Tendai Kamhungira
DEPUTY CHIEF WRITER
kamhungirat@dailynews.co.zwDOCTORS have warned authorities to fix quarantine centres to prevent a rise in coronavirus deaths and infections in the country, the Daily News reports.  This comes as 179 returning residents — including one who tested positive for the lethal virus — have fled the quarantine centres, saying that they are inhabitable.  It also comes as two more people have succumbed to Covid-19, amid a rapid spreading of the disease in the country.
Speaking to the Daily News yesterday, the secretary general of the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA), Aaron Musara, implored authorities to improve the deplorable condition at most quarantine centres.  “What is needed is to strengthen the quarantine facilities. We have people in quarantine centres who are sharing facilities in an unhygienic manner.  “They share ablution facilities, which is also causing the spread of the disease,” he said.
He added that some of the returnees were fleeing the centres due to their poor state, which exposed occupants to the deadly disease.  “You will find that those that are running away from the quarantine centres are trying to escape the bad environment in these facilities.  “We have to improve conditions in these centres. We had time to sort out our problems but we did not do enough and that is our challenge,” Musara said further.  This comes as police have launched a manhunt for nearly 180 returnees, including a man who tested positive for coronavirus — who have all escaped from quarantine centres around the country.  “The Zimbabwe Republic Police is appealing for information which may lead to the location of a 33-year-old who escaped from Harare Polytechnic isolation centre on June 15, 2020 — after testing positive for the Covid-19 virus, and a 28-year-old man who also escaped on June 17, 2020 before getting the results of his test,” police said at the weekend.  Meanwhile, the ministry of Health announced at the weekend the deaths of two more people who succumbed to the lethal virus — bringing the death toll to six since the country recorded its first victim in March this year.
So far, nearly 500 people have contracted the virus, with the majority of those being Zimbabweans returning home from the diaspora.  “Today we regret to report two deaths. One is a facility death and the other is a community death, both females aged 79 and 60, respectively.  “The facility death is from Bulawayo Province, who tested positive on the 17th of June 2020 and had other co-morbidities, whilst the community death is from Midlands Province, who tested positive for Covid-19 following routine swabbing on the 19th of June 2020,” the ministry said.