HARARE – Local rugby community has moved in to assist former Zimbabwe international Zivanai Dzinomurumbi, who is hospitalised in Masvingo with a heart ailment. The ex-player and coach needs to undergo a heart surgery and the Zimbabwe Rugby Union (ZRU) and fans alike are mobilising resources via various social media platforms. One of the pioneers of the local game, Dzinomurumbi is one of the first players of colour to wear the Sables jersey. As part of ensuring the continued growth of rugby in the country, he has been actively involved in coaching. Dzinomurumbi had a stint with the Sables took charge of Old Miltonians and Matebeleland. “At least two months’ supply of his (Dzinomurumbi) medication has already been bought…he is expected to start taking his medication…whilst been monitored by his physician,” ZRU said in a statement. “We all pray that he will respond in a very positive way. Once he recovers, we are hoping to transfer him to Harare to be under a specialist cardiac physiotherapist for his rehabilitation. “We also pray for his recovery and the optimization of his medication which he will take for life. In view of the current situation, ZRU has engaged various stakeholders to create a medical Trust that will look after…current and former players that find themselves in the same predicament.” Contributions continue to pour from far and wide with ZRU officials leading from the front. “He is in good spirit given the circumstances. He is a fighter and he sends his gratitude to the multitudes of rugby fans and supporters for their speedy response to the fundraising initiative,” added ZRU. Newly formed rugby club from Norton, the Norton Wolves donated US$60 through founder Brian Chikumba, UK based Bedford Chimbima has set up a Gofund to raise funds while ZRU vice president South Martin Shone contributed US$100 through Amatec Securities. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Zimbabwe Rugby Referees Society president Gerald Chipumha also chipped in with US$100 through Double C Construction while ZRU president Aaron Jani and vice president north Losson Mtongwiza forwarded US$1500 to kick start the fundraising initiative with High Performance Gear Company through its director and former Sables head coach Godwin Murambiwa weighed in with USD$100.