IN a major development for the local arts industry, Sony/ATV Music Publishing South Africa has announced Zimbabwe-born Munyaradzi Chanetsa (Munya) as the A&R manager for Africa with effect from today (June 1). Chanetsa who has over a decade experience as a to-level music executive will be responsible for finding new talent throughout the continent, promoting songwriters’ copyright and careers, and connecting them to larger opportunities around the world. He will also work closely with colleagues to pitch new and existing repertoire into the marketplace. The highly-rated Zimbabwean music executive joins Sony/ATV SA from Composers, Authors, Publishers’ Association of South Africa (CAPASSO) where he served as the head of licensing. Prior to that, Chanetsa was head of operations at Content Connect Africa, a post which also entitled him to assume the role of managing director of Content Connect Ghana and Content Connect International. Earlier in his career, he was the Africa head of marketing and promotions for New York-based Putumayo World Music. Chanetsa is happy to be joining the talent-laden Sony/ATV South Africa team. “I am joining a great team of talented people who share my passion, and I just cannot wait to see what we can all achieve together,” he said in a statement.
Sony/ATV South Africa managing director Rowlin Naicker is delighted that Chanetsa has joined the international music giant. Naicker is confident that Chanetsa’s extensive A&R and licensing experience across Africa will come in handy in his new role. “I have worked with Munya previously and I have no doubt we have a person here that brings with him dedication, passion and experience, which is key as we expand our publishing business across the continent. We are excited to work with him to achieve our goals,” said Naicker.
Sony/ATV president Guy Henderson is equally delighted to have managed to lure Chanetsa. “Munya is a creative talent with vast experience and a perfect fit for our company and its creative ambitions. With Munya’s position in the creative community both in South Africa and across the African continent he will be a great addition to our global team,” Henderson said. Sony/ATV Music Publishing is home to world-class songwriters, legendary catalogues and industry-leading synchronisation licensing and production music businesses. It represents many of the most iconic songs ever written by celebrated songwriters such as The Beatles, Bob. Dylan, Michael Jackson, Carole King, Queen, The Rolling Stones and Stevie Wonder, as well as contemporary superstars such as Beyoncé, Ed Sheeran, Pharrell Williams, Lady Gaga, Kanye West, P!nk, and Sam Smith. African songwriters on the books of Sony/ATV include the lateHugh Masekela, Abdullah Ibrahim, the late Brenda Fassie, Mdu, DJ Maphorisa, Samthing Soweto, E Kelly, Freshlyground, Mafikizolo, Mi Casa, Bongeziwe Mabandla, Beatenberg, Celebration, JR, D’Banj, Matthew Mole, Busiswa, Moonchild and Oskido.