Tinashe Sibanda
Lifestyle Writer
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw CHOICE Children Choir are disappointed that they will not be attending the World Choir Games 2020 which were set for July this year because of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Choice Children Choir had qualified to represent Zimbabwe at the World Choir Games 2020 which were meant to be held in Flanders, Belgium. The choir, which is made up of 44 singers was founded by Bright Gwati and Blessing Mutasa in 2017. It scouts Harare’s young voices which they take to the World Stages while developing and celebrating African Choral Music in Zimbabwe. The choir comprises children from diverse backgrounds with ages ranging between 10 and 16 years. It allows them to interact with peers from different social demographics ultimately creating a bridge between the different classes of Zimbabweans we have in our schooling system. In an interview with the Daily News, Choice Children’s Choir director and founder Gwati said: “I have taken a break from training the children due to this pandemic and as well the games which where postponed to next year. I’m fine with the development as long as this has been done for the children’s safety.” Gwati added that the games have been postponed to July next year although they had already acquired a number of sponsors. He said the choir was ready to do even better than they did in the previously held South African competitions. “I will not look at this as a setback or crisis because I believe everything happens for a reason and this will give the children more time to perfect their performances after the lockdown. “The children are, however, sad since they had been working since April last year and now all that work has been put to rest but the good thing is that they still have each other for moral support,” said Gwati. The Choice Children’s Choir has done concerts at a number of events in Harare including the National Institute of Allied Arts, Christmas Concerts as well as a tour of Bulawayo performing at the Academy of Music. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); At the World Choir Games in Tshwane South Africa, the choir achieved a Silver Diploma Level 9, two points away from a Gold Diploma and more notably, they performed at the Africa Legacy Concert in the exclusive Sun Arena for choirs from around the world with participation in a mass choir which had more than a thousand singers.