HARARE – More trouble is brewing for the embattled Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) board after the games stakeholders petitioned the government to immediately intervene and stop the number sport from sinking further. The stakeholders led by the militant former football administrator Francis Zimunya yesterday handed a petition to Justice minister Ziyambi Ziyambi, Home Affairs minister Kazembe Kazembe, the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zaac) and Sports minister Kirsty Coventry. In their petition, which was also handed to the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC), the group accuses the current board led by Felton Kamambo of maladministration, corruption and wants the government to intervene before things get out of hand. “We have today (yesterday) delivered in person the document and all the recipients acknowledged receipt. “Well, the purpose is to ensure that football development and sports in general is enhanced by removing all the impediments that retards its growth. “Furthermore, we need to see the provision of the necessary tools that rewards good governance and investment in football and sport in general,” Zimunya told the Daily News yesterday. At the moment, Kamambo is currently embroiled in a bribery storm with police currently looking into allegations that he paid at least 32 councillors to vote for him during the 2018 Zifa elections. Zifa are also embroiled in a messy legal wrangle with vice-president Gift Banda, who was suspended by Kamambo in 2019. Although Banda has successfully won his cases right up to the Zifa Appeals Committee, the association is still refusing to reinstate the Bulawayo-based businessman and politician. Zifa also brought the entire country into disrepute after a shambolic 2019 Africa Cup of Nations campaign in Egypt which was highlighted by the Warriors constant strikes over bonuses and appearance fees. This is despite that Zifa had received enough funds from the Confederation of African Football (Caf) while the government had also organised a successful fundraising campaign for the team. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Zifa and all sporting associations in general should be accountable to the generality of the people who pay their hard-earned cash to watch the game and also to those patriotic individuals and corporates who invest in football and sport in general. “We have the Finance Act that every institution should adhere to. All public funds should be managed in terms of the Finance Act which is being violated by most National Associations. This is a wakeup call to everyone involved,” Zimunya said. In the petition the stakeholders, who include the Lifelong Footballers Trust, Zimbabwe Soccer Legends, former Football Administrators, Pioneers of Women’s Soccer Association among others, are urging the SRC to lay down the law and intervene. “We urge the authorities ie the SRC and the PPC to instill discipline by using the SRC Act and take decisive action on errant Sports Associations when they violate the country’s laws and the Football Statutes,” reads part of the petition. “Nothing at all should be used as an excuse for mismanaging public funds and engaging in criminal and fraudulent activities much to the detriment of football development in this country. “Therefore, as football Stakeholders we do commit to support our Government, its justice and legal systems for the stance it has taken in its endeavour to uphold our country’s laws and ensure constitutionalism in Sport.”