Helen Kadirire
STAFF WRITER
kadirireh@dailynews.co.zwWOMEN’S Coalition in Zimbabwe (WCOZ) has called on the government to investigate living conditions at coronavirus quarantine and isolation centres around the country, the Daily News can report.  In a statement, the organisation said as the number of people returning from outside the country continues to rise, the government was yet to address concerns being raised by returnees.  The statement comes as more than 150 returnees escaped from quarantine centres around the country in the last fortnight.  “We call upon the Parliament of Zimbabwe to urgently deploy members of Parliament to undertake inspections at these mandatory centres and provide the necessary oversight of processes in the centres and critical public interest feedback.  “We call upon the Chapter 12 Commissions to undertake inspection visits to the mandatory centres to ensure that the rights of all persons in these centres are respected,” read part of the statement.  Sally Ncube, WCOZ national coordinator, said the returnees were losing personal belongings because of poor security at the centres.  Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights executive director Calvin Fambirai said the poor state of affairs at quarantine centres was a violation of human rights.  “Government should be reminded that the quarantine facilities must be upgraded to meet the minimum standards as demanded by the World Health Organisation and all returnees must be treated with dignity in accordance with the country’s regulations,” he said.  “Will be actively monitoring the quality of care in the quarantine facilities and will seek available forms of recourse in all substandard facilities that violates the rights of returning residents.  “We noted the passing on of a female returning resident at Mkoba Teachers College, a quarantine facility. Though Covid-19 is a pandemic of international concern, local citizens and returning residents must not be hindered from accessing healthcare for other ailments,” he said.  Deputy Minister of Social Welfare Lovemore Matuke told the Daily News it was difficult to have an exact figure of people housed at quarantine centres.  “We have been accommodating people closest to where they came from. Some people are finding teachers’ colleges appalling because they are accustomed to lavish lifestyles, while others will find the facilities acceptable,” Matuke said.