Tinashe Sibanda
LIFESTYLE WRITER
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw UNITED KINGDOM-based Robert Maweni recently officially launched a new mobile game called Afro Eights, available for free on Android and iOS. Maweni, who is an ear, nose and throat surgeon (otolaryngologist) based in the Oxford Deanery for Surgery, is part of a Zimbabwean team that developed this first commercially available online playing card game. The game is a very “African” take on the classic game of Crazy Eights, using the rules of how the Crazy Eights is played in Africa, and featuring playing cards designed to represent the authentic African heritage with Black characters and imagery that will win the hearts of players and observers alike. In an interview with the Daily News Maweni said: “As the world stays indoors to fight against coronavirus (Covid-19), here is a funny way to spend time with old friends and colleagues or with the family.” Played between two to six players, the objective of the game is to be the first to discard physical cards, navigating a variety of twists and turns with certain cards holding special attributes such as the “King” cards allowing one to play again, or the “2” cards ordering one’s opponent to draw two cards from the deck. Afro Eights recreates these moments well through its beautifully designed and intuitive User Interface which allows up to six players to fit and interact seamlessly on mobile phone and tablet screens. “Afro Eights will reconnect people and rekindle friendly rivalries and relationships as players seek to one-up each other and rise to the top of Afro Eights’ global leader board, in this game of skill, strategy and a dash of luck,” said Maweni. The crowning jewel in this game is the Multiplayer Mode which allows users to play each other from anywhere in the world and across platforms — this means iOS users can play with Android users, using the game’s specially designed and original software system. “There are also Windows and Mac versions in the pipeline too and this makes for a playing experience that will create hours of fun, laughter and banter, especially during these days of lockdown and social-distancing,” he added. The game also features a single player mode where users take on the computer, which uses a bespoke Artificial Intelligence system which learns and adapts to suit the player’s skill over time. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });