 Jeffery Muvundusi
in BUALWAYO THE inaugural Bulawayo Day and Bulawayo Arts Festival scheduled for June 1-6 2020 has been postponed to June 2021 due to the current coronavirus (Covid-19) national lockdown. City of Bulawayo senior public relations officer Nesisa Mpofu said for the past few weeks, in conjunction with all the partners and stakeholders, they have been working hard to explore all avenues to put on this year’s festival, including moving the dates to later in the year. “However, due to the continuing uncertainty regarding holding of public gatherings, the increasing number of coronavirus positive cases, the threat to people’s health, and the potential need for an extended period of social distancing, we have taken the collective decision to suspend our 2020 programme as it was planned. “We will, however, still recognise June 1 as Bulawayo Day. We will also hold a digital launch and three special virtual/online pop-up events from Wednesday (June 3) to Friday (June 5) on the Byo Arts Festival and City of Bulawayo Facebook pages. “The same programmes will also be posted on the BAF TV Channel on YouTube as delayed content. The Bulawayo Arts festival which was scheduled for 1-6 June 2020 was going to run under the theme “WOW” (short for We Own Winter) as all activities were expected to illuminate the usually not so active winter month in Zimbabwe.” Mpofu added that some reasons for this decision have been because of international travel restrictions that will make it impossible for conference speakers and some festival performers to gain entry into the country. “Restrictions on large scale assembly are likely to continue and events such as concerts and festivals may remain banned for the foreseeable future. “Our fundraising initiatives for Bulawayo Day and Bulawayo Arts Festival have been profoundly affected by the pandemic. Some of our partners have temporarily suspended the funding of activities that fall outside the radar of Covid-19 response mechanisms. Corporates have been severely affected as well, with most recording huge losses and the risk of closure.” She said while the immediate future is uncertain, they are optimistic that the pioneering spirit of the city festival will continue through various pop up events during the year and leading to June 2021. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “So, while we are suspending our 2020 plans for now, encouraging our creatives and audiences to stay at home and fully supporting our artists’ withdrawal from this year’s festival, please be assured that we remain committed to re-launching fully in 2021. “The celebration of Bulawayo Day and the hosting of the Bulawayo Arts Festival aim to provide a stage for new and established artists and enable local people and our global visitors to participate meaningfully in the cultural life of the city. “It also provides an opportunity for Bulawayo to showcase its proud heritage, rich diversity, creative nature, resilience and majesty. This explosion of arts and culture will put Bulawayo on the global spotlight and encourage its tourism and business. “We are very sad to have had to make this decision — particularly for the many artists who were billed and had made such great work and for all the audiences and people for whom the festival is so important. We’ll be in touch once we have more news and dates for the future but for now, stay safe and look out for each other,” said Mpofu. 