PARTICIPATING musicians at the long-awaited and highly-anticipated Bulawayo Arts Festival (BAF) which ran from June 3 to 5 under the theme #We Own Winter have shared their experience.  The City of Bulawayo and her technical partner Nhimbe Trust digitally hosted the inaugural Bulawayo Day and the Bulawayo Arts Festival 2020 amid the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic lockdown.  Selmor Mtukudzi said: “It was such an honour for me to be a part of the inaugural Bulawayo Arts Festival. I had so much fun. We’ve had a bit of experience performing virtually for people, and we’re used to it now. But I especially loved performing in Bulawayo. The organisers knew what they were doing, and the production team was so professional. I loved the stage, lighting, the sound — everything was just perfect. “The (Bulawayo) band The Outfit backed us, with only a very short rehearsal, and they did a fantastic job. I loved BAF and hope they grow and become a much bigger festival. People should look out for them!” Jeys Marabini said: “It was a very, very good festival and what I liked is that these artists didn’t stop doing performances because of Covid-19, they just wanted to go on, even if it was digital. We have a lot of people saying the festival was amazing and the performances were great. I want to say congratulations to Bulawayo Arts Festival for doing something different, something fresh — the stage, sound and everything was amazing. Thank you very much for having me, and to the musicians of the band which backed me. The festival was great and we are looking forward to 2021!” Sandra Ndebele said: “It was a different environment but we loved it. It was a beautiful platform, the stage was beautiful, lighting guy was amazing, everything on point. Hoping next year it will be way bigger and better. Thanks to the organisers and sponsors, and for me amazing beautiful — culture which are used to live shows and performing for a zero stage was a bit awkward but it came out so nice and we loved it. Fans were screaming all over saying it was too short, so [laughing] there is the challenge to make it even bigger. Thank you.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Saimon Mambazo Phiri said: “From my side it’s been very interesting to see the progression from traditional theatre and venue spaces to taking content online. The realisation that most people actually don’t have content also helped us to try and ensure that everything that was done for the BAF was done at its best because we are also aware that we are being seen from a global audience perspective. But the festival has also proved that Bulawayo is one of the few cities in this world that can actually hold a multicultural festival without importing any talent.  “We are aware of the fact that there is an abundance of talent but we probably need to start packaging it better for international audiences. It’s a good measuring barometer and starting point for other festivals to follow because precedence has already been set and hopefully Zimbabwe can up the game so that we all do better, because we all have to keep live arts alive. We realise there is a ready audience for the kind of work that festivals do offer and most people are actually surprised that Zimbabwe, let alone Bulawayo, can actually offer that kind of variety in terms of a festival online. I would like to thank everyone who worked to put the festival together so successfully.”