DEFENCE minister Oppah Muchinguri-Kashiri, as is expected of a top official and the deputy chairperson of the Covid-19 taskforce, didn’t mince her words when she briefed Parliament about the pandemic’s trajectory. There’s no doubt that she was alluding mainly to challenges arising from truck drivers’ escapades, smuggling syndicates’ operations and that of returnees evading/fleeing quarantine centres when she said authorities were ill-prepared to effectively manage returning residents and deportees. However, the minister’s statement opens a Pandora’s Box and raises more questions than answers: Are the authorities not also ill-prepared to deal with citizens residing in the country? With what’s happening on the ground, can Zimbabwe contain the surging infections? Hordes of people are seen daily moving around trying to eke out a living. Long queues are the order of the day at shops, termini, electricity outlets, and so on — with face masks and social distancing forsaken. A colleague recently witnessed 18 people jumping onto the back of a small truck downtown desperate to get home after work. They all had face masks hanging on their chins with their mouths and noses exposed — prompting him to coin the term “chin masks”. It was as good as not wearing the face masks. Social distancing was not observed as the workers were forced to throw caution to the wind due to transport problems. If you take this soft approach towards coronavirus into consideration, Muchinguri-Kashiri’s revelation sends a chill down the spine, or more appropriately “sends a corona down the spine”. And it is only by the grace of God that we are not dying like flies. Health minister Obadiah Moyo also alerted Parliament to the possibility of a further spike in Covid-19 infections indicating that the issue of returnees and deportees posed a huge threat in our battle against the pandemic. The importance of reporting to authorities all returnees who do not go through proper procedures has to be raised again and again for the sake of our protection. The message that coronavirus is real and deadly must be hammered daily and reach all corners of the country so that people don’t take it lightly. Authorities need to educate residents on World Health Organisation guidelines and ensure they are implemented. Stringent measures have to be taken to enable proper repatriation procedures and health screening. Surveillance of illegal returnees, truck drivers and smuggling syndicates cannot be overemphasized.
Some truck drivers are reportedly smuggling returnees from neighbouring countries for a fee. They bribe their passage easily through security and health personnel at borders and along the way. On the other hand smuggling syndicates use illegal crossing points along the Limpopo River to bring goods into the country daily. By breaking the lockdown conditions as they cross the border illegally they expose locals in the areas and the country at large to Covid-19. South Africa has the highest number of confirmed coronavirus cases on the continent.
Vice President Kembo Mohadi, who leads the taskforce, recently said smugglers operating along our borders with South Africa and Mozambique pose a serious threat to efforts to contain Covid-19. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The government should carry out its promise to tighten security at the quarantine centres.
National Covid-19 coordinator in the Office of the President and Cabinet Agnes Mahomva stressed the need to secure quarantine facilities and ports of entry since most confirmed cases were imported. “What this means is we need to further strengthen our response such as screening, testing and follow-ups in these areas, which have now become high risk zones to Covid-19. This is what we call science-based interventions, using the data that we have and WHO guidelines to shape our programming,” she said. The well-being of returnees and citizens who are on mandatory quarantine including health workers and security officers based at some of the centres is at high risk, according to media reports. Quarantined trouble causers, especially former convicts, have to be dealt with decisively. Authorities also need to improve the appalling conditions at these centres instead of just blaming those who flee from the facilities. There have been complaints that social distancing is not being observed at some quarantine centres and the facilities are not being disinfected while the returnees are not being subjected to regular temperature testing. While publication of donations received to fight Covid-19 is a positive step in enhancing transparency, our leaders need to do more to account for how all resources are being procured and used. Together, with dedication and solidarity, we will defeat corona.