Vasco Chaya LIFESTYLE WRITER chayav@dailynews.co.zw THE A-list of local gospel musicians is today set to “break the fast” during the Day of Prayer and Fasting to be aired live on national television and other social media platforms. This comes as President Emmerson Mnangagwa declared today as the Day of Prayer and Fasting in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The musicians to share the stage tonight are Michael Mahendere, Charles and Olivia Charamba, Mathias Mhere, Mambo Dhuterere, Janet Manyowa, Family Voices, Dorcas Moyo, Kuda Mutsvene, Note2etoN, Blessing Shumba and Emmanuel Marecha. “The national Prayer Day gospel concert will be live on ZBC Tv, on ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation and National Arts Council of Zimbabwe Facebook pages. It will run from 9pm till midnight under the theme ‘Breaking the Fast in Fighting Covid-19,” National Arts Council of Zimbabwe communication and marketing manager Rodney Ruwende confirmed. Of late, online concerts are the way to go for musicians following the government’s decision to suspend all the arts and entertainment activities in order to curb the spread of the deadly coronavirus pandemic by discouraging crowds. Since the coronavirus national lockdown was put in place on March 30, multi-award-winning gospel diva Manyowa, on her own, has managed to hold two concerts online, reaching out to thousands of her fans in the process. “I’m looking forward to this concert. Previously, I did two concerts — Switch on Zimbabwe and Ndimi (Lockdown Version) — during the course of the national lockdown as I wanted them to be memorable. On Switch on Zimbabwe, we have managed to get corporate sponsorship. Apart from sponsorships, the concerts attracted thousands of hits on social media which is a good thing for the growth of Janet Manyowa Music brand,” Manyowa said. Though performing digitally is a bit different from the usual concerts where the crowd will motivate the musicians on the stage, Manyowa believes gospel musicians are motivated by the desire to preach the “good news”. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The (Monday) concert will go a long way in giving hope to the hopeless people during this period of coronavirus pandemic. In music, some musicians get their energy or fuel from the crowd but for us gospel musicians we are here to give hope to the nation especially in this coronavirus period. “When we preach the Word through music, we are not worried about the crowds but the intended purpose matters most. We can preach to just one person. Though it’s a different ball game (online concerts), it is good that we are continuing preaching the gospel to thousands of people through the Internet,” the Zadzisa singer said.    