AS THE MDC’s factional wars continue to escalate, a party youth leader yesterday accused his rivals of allegedly being behind a petrol bomb attack at his residence on Sunday, the Daily News reports. This comes as re-instated MDC secretary-general Douglas Mwonzora has said that he was “violently confronted” by some angry youths belonging to an opposing faction, during a meeting he had with councillors in Ruwa on Saturday. The youth leader in the Thokozani Khupe camp, Gilbert Bgwende, told the Daily News that he had been targeted by rivals belonging to the Nelson Chamisa group — who allegedly threw a petrol bomb at his home on Sunday night.
Bgwende said he was asleep at the time, and was awoken by the ensuing explosion.
“When I peeped through the window, I saw a ball of fire from the top of the car. I dashed out calling for help from my neighbours, who managed to put out the fire.
“We then called the police who responded soon after … I suspect it’s all political because I have previously been threatened by people aligned to Chamisa.
“They once approached me to work with Chamisa and when I refused I was labelled Mwonzora and (Elias) Mudzuri’s person,” Bgwende told the Daily News.
The incident was reported at Milton Park Police Station, under case number RRB 4403876.
Reacting to the allegations, MDC Alliance deputy spokesperson, Clifford Hlatshwayo, denied that his camp was responsible for the attack, accusing Mwonzora and Bgwende of having allegedly set themselves against the people. “They view you as an enemy. When you attack Chamisa you become their enemy. As a party we condemn violence of any kind,” he said.
Police spokesperson Paul Nyathi said yesterday that enforcement agents were investigating the incident.
“The Zimbabwe Republic Police confirms that we have received a report from Gilbert Bgwende concerning an incident in the ZRP Milton policing area, and we are conducting investigations,” he said.
Meanwhile, Mwonzora says he was “violently” confronted by some party youths after addressing councillors in Ruwa on Saturday. “They were under the command of a young man known as Davison Chamisa. They wanted to provoke us, but we maintained our cool as they shouted at us.
“They realised that we were not intimidated by their antics, and they later left us,” Mwonzora told the Daily News yesterday.
“We urge our members to exercise restraint and not be drawn into this violence because this is an act of cowardice.
“We know that they are desperate and dangerous as well. It is a reaction to their failure to forcibly take Harvest House,” he added.
Khupe and Chamisa have been tearing at each other ever since the Supreme Court upheld an earlier High Court ruling which nullified the latter’s ascendancy to the leadership of the MDC.