SOUTH Africa-based RnB sensation Portia ‘‘Tia’’ Njazi has exciting news for her loyal fans as she has just completed recording her fourth album. Tia became a household name in 2003, thanks to the popularity of the hit song Boy You Got To Know — a single that sold over 50 000 copies within the first three months of release and enjoyed overwhelming airplay across the continent. The golden song was also an integral part of social gatherings, from weddings to graduation parties. “The track Boy You Got to Know was just a song that I wrote for fun. So I took on professional people to actually work on the project with me. On the sound, I engaged Fortune Muparutsa and the video was done by Marian Kunonga. I left them to do all they wanted and to be honest I do not even know everyone in that video.” The timeless video featured Hollywood actor Tongai Chirisa and instrumentalist, Adam Chisvo, who is now late.
Of her new album she says: “I have been working on my craft for some time, my sound has to be right and if it is not something that satisfies me I will not put it out there. I have just finished recording and I have got an EP coming this year. I have delayed it because of what is happening right now (Covid-19 national lockdown),” said Tia. The album is made up of seven tracks. “One of the songs on the album was inspired by a Chris Brown song which he did a long time ago with Little Wayne, so I did my own version.” It seems like the former Monash University student has matured with age like good wine. “I have grown up, matured vocally and my subject matter has changed. When I did Boy You Got to Know, I was just like 17. However, despite the change, I have maintained my style in the new music. I’m really excited about this long awaited release which was jointly produced by talent from Zimbabwe, South Africa and the USA. “I am doing it all for my fans who have always supported me throughout the years. It’s a fun-filled playlist about love, enjoying life, believing in yourself and being confident. I will also be surprising fans with a few singles off the album until the big release.” She recently got a stamp of approval during an Instagram live from prolific and talented American songwriter, Sean Garrett, who has written hits for big artistes such as Beyonce, Nicki Minaj, Ciara, Destiny’s Child, Pussy Cat Dolls and Fergie, among others. Garrett said: “…don’t this sound different to a lot of artistes here, give the girl her props.”
In another live chat Tia got an outstanding review from award-winning producer Amadeus who has produced over 60 artistes who include Chris Brown, JLo, Keysha Cole, 50 Cent and Trey Songz. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He said: “…that joint is banging, that could be on radio right now, in New York.”
Tia’s discography includes Spice It Up and Euphoria, among others. With Spice It Up, she won the 2007 Zimbabwe Music Awards gong.