AFRO-fusion musician Ashton “Mbeu” Nyahora spent Fathers’ Day commemorations serenading the elderly in their homes and places of worship. Fathers’ Day is celebrated on the third weekend of June annually.
The day is observed across many countries in the world and is an opportunity to celebrate manhood and to acknowledge the daily roles played by fathers. Mbeu said this gesture was one of several innovations that he has been undertaking to connect with his growing fan base in adhering to the national lockdown enforced to mitigate the impact of the spread of the novel coronavirus, Covid-19. “Being a father comes with huge responsibilities,” said the Pakare Paye-bred musician.
“Fathers are faced with difficulties of providing and making sure their offspring are safe.
“Fatherhood goes beyond being biological and I have personally enjoyed the care of many father figures, having lost my own at a young age.” Mbeu said that by taking his music to various homes, he is paying back for the huge support he has received during his career. “I believe by strumming the guitar to a few fathers that I could surprise, I have played my role as an artiste to repay the many fathers that have played different roles in my life and career.” The Mavanga hitmaker said he was using the Father’s Day occasion to maintain a personal relationship with those that follow his music. “Music has to have a personal touch. Nothing beats the connection between a musician and people.
“This is what live shows are all about. Obviously staging such shows is impossible under the circumstances but even then we have to be innovative and find ways to connect with the fan base.”
Mbeu, who recently dropped a musical video of Kafira Mberi from his latest offering, assured fans to expect more from his stable. “We will certainly drop other new material in this year.
“I am pleased that we have already dropped a single and a video. Both productions have done well and we are encouraged to do more.” He added that he is in discussions with other top African musicians in producing collaborations and exploring tours post the Covid-19 pandemic.