ZESN – ZIMBABWE Election Support Network (Zesn) notes with concern the continued suspension of electoral activities by the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (Zec) without consulting key electoral stakeholders. Initially, on May 25, Zec announced the indefinite suspension of all electoral processes. While announcing plans to resume some electoral activities, Zec’s press release dated Friday June 5 noted: “The commission would like to remind the public that those electoral activities that require gatherings will remain suspended to avoid violating lockdown measures currently in place.” Whilst acknowledging the risk that the novel coronavirus exposes those involved in elections, Zesn reiterates its position that Zec could have reached a decision after engaging key stakeholders such as political parties, Civil Society Organisations and even citizens. Engagement with regards to whether or not to suspend electoral activities could have been done through virtual or any other means adhering to measures aimed at preventing the spread of Covid-19. In the absence of these consultations, Zec could at least have considered postponing, rather than suspending electoral activities. But even postponement cannot be indefinite.
Zesn is of the position that Zec could proceed with by-elections and other electoral activities, ensuring Covid-19 preventative measures are in place for voters, polling officials, political party agents as well as observers. This is particularly so because the Covid-19 pandemic may be here to stay, no one knows for how long.
Zesn notes that the suspension of electoral activities was not done in terms of the law.
Sections 158 (3) and 121 (a) of the Constitution provide that Zec should conduct polling in by-elections to fill vacancies in Parliament and local authorities, fix the polling dates for local authority by-elections within 90 days after the vacancies occur. Section 132 allows Zec to change dates, but does not mandate Zec to change without giving notice of its decision in the Gazette and in the media and beyond 90 days. Zesn envisages to see a comprehensive Covid-19 electoral practice policy that is reflective of key electoral stakeholders’ input. Consultations and stakeholder engagement is one of the progressive provisions in the current Zec strategic plan. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Electoral stakeholders play a key role in creating public confidence in Zec and ensuring public support in its policies and programmes,” reads the Zec Strategic Plan 2019-202, page 23. Recently, Zesn noted that Parliament has been engaging with stakeholders and Zec should have taken a cue from that so as to enhance trust and confidence. Indications are that Parliament may soon embark on public hearings on Constitutional Amendment Bill No.2. Given that a number of countries have so far held electoral activities amid Covid-19, Zec could draw lessons to guide the conduct of elections under more or less similar circumstances so as not to quarantine democracy. Furthermore, Zimbabweans queue on a daily basis for basic commodities, cash withdrawals at banks and money agents, social welfare and food aid from different organisations whilst observing safety measures. Besides the above proposed measures that would help ensure elections are conducted in a manner that reduces chances of spreading Covid-19, there is need to institute reforms that will ensure the credibility in elections and electoral processes. There is need to strike a balance between ensuring the health and safety of all stakeholders and upholding the law.
Zesn thus recommends more dialogue between Zec and electoral stakeholders on alternative methods of conducting other electoral processes that will ensure the health and safety for all involved. Overall, Zec’s decision on the way forward regarding conducting electoral processes amid Covid-19 should be informed by an inclusive consultative process that taps into the views of all concerned stakeholders.