Godknows Matarutse SPORTS WRITER matarutseg@dailynewsonsunday.co.zw ©️   ZIMBABWE international forward Tino Kadewere could not have asked for a better mentor in a star-studded dressing room at his new French club Olympique Lyon than Dutch international Memphis Depay, who he describes as a “machine”.  The ex-PSV Eindhoven and Manchester United forward, who has been at Lyon since January 2017, is playing a huge role in helping the Warriors international settle at the club after he was officially unveiled two weeks ago. And to his own admission, it is a totally different new level for Kadewere from Ligue 2 where he was with Le Havre, but thanks to Depay, the Zimbabwean is already feeling at home at the club’s base at Groupama OL Training Centre. In a squad that also features the likes of Moussa Dembélé, Bertrand Traore and Rafael da Silva, Kadewere is pleased with the way the Dutch international has taken him under his win.  “It has always been a dream to play Champions League football and for sure if it happens soon then, it will be a huge boost to my career,” Kadewere exclusively told the Daily News on Sunday last week. “It also gets to push knowing that this is a whole new level playing with the best players in the whole world it will surely be a dream come true. It feels so different, a whole new level for me and I’m just glad all these guys took me in very quickly like one of their own and it gave me some confidence. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “It’s quite enjoyable and you get to learn a lot also from these guys, especially Depay his a very good leader and good thing we sit together in the dressing room so I get to learn a lot from him. “…he (Depay) gets to ask about how my career has been until now and even push me to work harder because the guy is a machine. Everyone just makes me feel at home and it is important and gives me confidence.” Kadewere’s journey has been remarkable having joined Castle Lager Premiership side Harare City, straight from Prince Edward School and he is now at top French club like Lyon in just five years. In fact, he was a subject of interest from teams across Europe in the English Premier League, Ligue 1, La Liga and the Turkish Super Lig. In the end, the Highfield-born striker finally settled for the seven-time French champions after winning the Ligue 2 Golden Boot with 18 goals following the cancelation of the season due to the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak. That hot scoring streak convinced Lyon sporting director Juninho Pernambucano to match the €16.6 million price tag placed on the forward by Le Havre. With Dembele’s future at the club a subject of speculation due to interest from several European clubs, Kadewere could find himself in the spotlight. However, he is not putting himself under any pressure largely due to the support he is receiving from Juninho; a Lyon legend, who led the club to seven consecutive title between 2001 and 2008. “To be honest, yes, there might be rumours (regarding Dembele) but I am not thinking about that, I am here to do my work and focus on the pitch; whatever happens outside the pitch, I do not follow that,” Kadewere said. “The day I signed, he (Juninho) told me, I should never worry; he knows I have the capabilities to do well here and he has extra faith in me and he also told me to just continue being myself and everything will go well. “For me it was a huge honour winning the Golden Boot at Le Havre but I know it’s all God’s work and for now with Lyon, my targets are to get used to the team and the new level; be able to perform at my best in every game and the rest will leave it to God.” After his meteoric rise in French football, Kadewere will always pay tribute to his late father Onias, for laying the foundation when he was still a young boy in learning his trade at Zimbabwe Grounds in Highfields. “It’s sad that he could not be here to witness all the things he really wanted to happen but I know wherever he is right now, he is so proud and I will make sure I make him happy, I am who I am today because of that man and he will forever be my role model,” Kadewere said.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw