Godknows Matarutse SPORTS WRITER matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw CASTLE Lager Premiership chairperson Farai Jere has lauded the decision by the Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) to bail out local teams from the devastating effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. At the weekend, Zifa announced they would bail out clubs and women’s football, a decision Jere said will go a long way in cushioning the teams during these trying times. The coronavirus has presented an unprecedented health risk for sports and in some of the countries where football activities have resumed, they are following strict medical guidelines. For instance, players and staff are being tested regularly before and after training sessions and matches. The games are also taking place behind closed doors with no paying fans allowed anywhere near the venues. Away teams usually book two players in a single room while on the road but due to coronavirus, this is no longer possible, with each person getting their own hotel room. Due to social distancing protocols, the sizes of changing rooms and dugouts have had to be significantly increased as well. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); However, implementing these drastic health protocols can be a huge financial challenge for teams on the continent as all this costs a lot of money. In Zimbabwe, most top flight clubs are on the brink of collapse as they usually rely on gate takings to fund their operations. Jere said the league is currently seized with exploring ways on how they can start the season. Speaking soon after their board meeting at the weekend, Zifa president Felton Kamambo said it was agreed to bail out local teams after realising the troubles they are going through. “PSL said they are facing challenges in as far as the running of clubs are concerned and the board provisionally agreed to assist the PSL,” Kamambo said. “We will come back to them on June 20, the secretariat will work on a paper on how we are going to assist them. “The PSL chairman (Jere) gave a detailed account of how our teams are struggling and the board made a decision to assist.”