Tendai Kamhungira
and Blessings Mashaya
STAFF WRITERS ©️  A SHOWDOWN is looming between the government and its workers over salaries, amid a fast-deteriorating economic crisis threatening to bring the country to a standstill. This comes as the government and the workers failed to reach an agreement last week during a meeting of the Tripartite Negotiating Forum (TNF), a platform that brings together government, labour and industry. And as the situation continues to deteriorate, government workers also petitioned their employer last week, demanding a pay rise equivalent to US$550. “We are pushing for negotiations. Prices are going up every day. The money is not enough for rent.
“We wrote to them last Thursday highlighting to them that we need to be paid an equivalent amount of US$550, which we were getting in October 2018,” Apex Council organising secretary Charles Chinosengwa told the Daily News yesterday. He said according to their January agreement with government, the salaries were supposed to be reviewed quarterly and as such this should have been done in April. “However, the process was affected by the coronavirus pandemic. We reminded them in April and they said they were looking into it. We wrote to them again last Thursday to remind them and we have not yet got a response,” he said. A number of government workers are getting less than $3 000, which is plus or minus US$46.
According to April’s ZimStat statistics, the consumption poverty line was at $6 420, 87 for a family of five. The figure has since risen due to inflation, which has seen prices of basic commodities shooting up by more than 100 percent in the last few weeks. And as inflation continues to rise, more pressure is being piled on the working class, which has to make do with this amount to cater for transport, food, schools fees and rent. The government last week urged the workers to be more patient as the salaries issue was still being looked into.
Deputy Labour minister Lovemore Matuke said the government would go by the outcome of the TNF meetings. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “TNF is still looking at those issues and workers’ representatives are putting across their demands. Whatever comes from the TNF meetings will determine what is going to happen on the issue of civil servants’ salaries. “They must be patient because they sent their representatives to TNF and they must wait for the feedback. Government is trying to address their concerns and they must be patient,” Matuke said. This comes at a time when calls are becoming louder for the government to dump the ever-devaluing Zimbabwean dollar and adopt the US dollar or join the Rand Monetary Union to win the inflation battle. Zimbabwe for at least 10 years used a basket of currencies, before reintroducing the Zimbabwean dollar as the sole currency of trade last year. However, the Zimbabwean dollar has succumbed to inflation punches against the bullish US dollar.
The Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU), said the only way out was for the government to pay salaries in US dollars, as there was no end in sight of the current challenges if workers continued to be paid in the local currency.
‘ZCTU president Peter Mutasa said the workers would continue demanding a pay rise every time the currency was hit by inflation. “From the June pay day, it will not be business as usual. Workers should not even demand a pay rise in Zimbabwean dollars. We are calling all workers and trade unions to demand salaries in US dollars. Inflation is now over 1 000 percent,” Mutasa said. He said workers were living in abject poverty, adding that accepting salaries in Zimbabwean dollars will not address the challenges of inflation and currency devaluation. “We have to unite to wage a struggle to succeed. Everyone is being robbed. Subsistence farmers are being robbed, they buy inputs in US dollars and are forced to sell their products in the local devalued currency. “Those in the informal sector are also importing using foreign currency but sell their products in Zimbabwean dollars, big corporates are also losing their assets,” he added.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw 