Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zwDYNAMOS hope to be a trendsetter in domestic football by embracing sports science in their quest to add a 22nd title in their trophy cabinet once the 2020 season eventually kicks-off.  The country’s most successful football club received an assortment of sports science equipment from their Belgian partners Ligi Sport Pvt Ltd yesterday.  DeMbare received desktop computers, laptops, ipads, headphones and projectors as the relationship with the Belgians continues to bear fruit.  The Glamour Boys are also set to receive video cameras, GPS vests and other sports science-related equipment once airlines resume flights.  Speaking at the unveiling ceremony of the goods, Dynamos chairperson Isiah Mupfurutsa insisted the technology will help them adapt to modern trends of professional sports.  Most local teams still operate with a primitive mindset in which they are yet to use modern technology like GPS, video analysis and biokenitics to improve their players’ performances.  “This is actually very important. This is the required equipment in modern day football. Soccer has evolved and gone scientific, it’s no longer the same as before,” Mupfurutsa said.  “There is a lot that is taking place now and coaches are becoming more and more technical. If you look at how it is done in more advanced leagues in Europe, you can actually agree that soccer has become scientific. This equipment, which is coming from our partners in Belgium, will go a long way in setting the foundation towards our goal of becoming professional.  “They agreed to donate this equipment to us because they know how it is used in the modern game.”
Earlier this year, DeMbare coach Tonderai Ndiraya spent a month in Belgium where he visited top clubs like Anderlecht, Club Brugge and KAS Upen and was exposed to how teams are using technology in their training sessions and match-day analysis.  “Even when our coach went there, he saw how these things are used, he saw that those teams use a lot of technology,” Mupfurutsa said.  “With this equipment we will strengthen the recording of matches so that we can also do game reviews so that we can actually ascertain what went wrong and even at training sessions.”
Mupfurutsa said their next step will be to recruit the requisite personnel that will be able to use the technology as part of Ndiraya’s backroom staff.  With Dynamos’ sponsors Gold Leaf Tobacco coming in to bankroll the club with a lucrative package, Mupfurutsa said they are now concentrating on shoring up their commercial side.The Glamour Boys’ benefactor has even gone a step further to adjust the players’ salaries according to the prevailing economic conditions.
Despite being the most successful team in the domestic game and attracting a huge following, DeMbare have over the years failed to unlock their true commercial value. 