©️ FINANCE minister Mthuli Ncube admitted yesterday that the parallel market is giving them sleepless nights as it is causing price hikes.
This comes after tobacco farmers yesterday complained that if 100 percent retention is not possible, the Zimbabwe dollar sales proceeds be paid at an open and floating exchange rate.
“Farmers find themselves in a very precarious viability position with ZWL returns being paid at 25:1 against retooling rates of +70:1 and rising. Farmers are in fact losing a third of their income because of rate differentials. “June traditionally is the start of extensive seedbed preparations for the new season. However currently, there is reduced activity when compared to last season,” Zimbabwe Tobacco Association (ZTA) chairperson  Rodney Ambrose said during the Finance minister’s tour of Tianze Tobacco Floors in Harare, where he met tobacco stakeholders.
In his response, Ncube promised to deal with the issue but admitted that it’s not easy.“I am here to listen to their concerns. One of them is the retention ratio, the exchange rate and the issue of the general payment system.
“Their concerns are useful for me to come and listen and when we go back, we see what can be fine-tuned, and what can be done quickly.
“We want to make sure that farmers can get back on the land and can afford the inputs. You know, at the moment our biggest challenge is the parallel market which has been pushing up prices stifling some farmers’ capacity to source inputs so that they can go back on the land.
“This time we are well-positioned. If you look at other competitors, Brazil and the United States, their output is lower this year.
“We have been doing quite well as compared to last year. The prices are just good as compared to last year. I just went through one row, I did quick calculations and the price is about US$4,50 per kg. Last year, same time, similar quality, the price was one dollar lower.
“So, this year we have got very good prices.  We have listened and we will look into those issues and try to do something.
“We want to make sure that farmers access their money easily,” Ncube said.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw