 Blessing Masakadza
LIFESTYLE WRITER
masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw SUNGURA musician Peter Moyo aka Young Igwe says the current on-going online performances are a blessing in disguise as they have unlocked opportunities for him. Peter has so far since the national coronavirus (Covid-19) performed on three live events among them the Culture Week concert and the NashTV Lockdown-sponsored concert. On Saturday, Peter was part of another online performance sponsored by Hanawa Foods and aired on Nash TV dubbed Sungura Vs Dancehall on Friday Night Live and he represented the genre with a great performance supported by his Utakataka Express. Other musicians billed to perform on the sungura side were Suluman Chimbetu and DJ Shugeta while dancehall was represented by Bazooka, Kinnah and DJ Merciless. Peter thanked the sponsors for pitting sungura and dancehall, adding: “Zimdancehall singers should get some lessons from us and I’m happy the organisers gave them an opportunity to learn from us.” While musicians have been the hardest hit after the ban on entertainment gatherings which is meant to curb the spread of coronavirus, the singer said online performances have exposed them to a wider audience. Young Igwe told the Daily News yesterday that featuring on these online gigs has resulted in him getting calls from overseas show organisers. NashTV for example flights its programme on Facebook, hence its reach is global. “The responses we are getting are encouraging. While we are in a difficult lockdown period, the online shows have opened other doors for us. We are now getting calls from event organisers in other countries who have watched us performing. All they say is we didn’t know you could perform like that,” he said. He said the online sessions have increased their visibility which he believes has attracted more followers. “There are many people who have not been to our shows and for them watching us performing online has made them fall in love with our work and I’m sure we will be having more people attending our shows.” Since the lockdown started on March 30, NashTV has given established and aspiring musicians the platform to shine with performers coming from all local genres that include gospel, sungura and Zimdancehall. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); So far the groups that have showcased on NashTV include Mbeu and the Mhodzi Tribe, Levels and his Chillspot groups, Andy Muridzo, Mahendere Brothers, Mai Patai, Blessing Shumba, Jah Signal, Alick Macheso, Freeman, Silent Killer, T-Gonz, Progress Chipfumo, Van Choga, Nyasha Mutonhori, Jose Sax and dancers that include the Expendables. Apart from its Facebook slot, NashTV has also partnered ZBC TV where it is screening 20 episodes of musicals.