CITY of Bulawayo and its technical partner Nhimbe Trust have been hailed for successfully and digitally hosting the inaugural Bulawayo Day and the Bulawayo Arts Festival 2020 amid the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic lockdown. The long-awaited and highly-anticipated Bulawayo Arts Festival (BAF) exploded into life under the theme #We Own Winter, and ran from June 3 to 5. Although driven online by the restrictions of the Covid-19 epidemic, it was no less vibrant in colourful, energetic performances and strong messages for the multitudes of viewers who watched it from different parts of the world. Broadcast live via Facebook from 6pm to 8pm for three days, the celebration of the inaugural Bulawayo Day and festival week rolled out an exciting array of artists from different genres and disciplines. Interspersed with fashion and design, interviews, discussions and messages from Mayor Solomon Mguni, minister of Arts Kirsty Coventry and leaders in the cultural sector, the online “shows” attracted thousands of viewers over the three days. The production featured both established and upcoming artists across the board, with outstanding performances from the likes of popular and award-winning afro-jazz musician Jeys Marabini, veteran saxophonist Basil Kumpeu, Hudson Simbarashe, the acclaimed Iyasa, rappers Mzoe 7 and Obudi Be Space, Mandla the Comedian, poets Philani Amadeus aka PAN, Mgcini Nyoni, the budding Delah, and more. Outstanding young women artists included Lorraine Stot, Nkwali, Vuyo Brown, Lady Tshawe, Michelle Moyo, Sandra Ndebele an Selmor Mtukudzi. There were also beautiful male vocals from the acclaimed imbube group Indonsakusa Morningstar, theatre pieces by Umkathi Theatre Works, Gifford High School, an adaptation by Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo of The Vagina Monologues by Eves Ensler, and Blood Tongue, The Musical by Nhimbe Trust. Conversations were held with writer and historian Pathisa Nyathi, Rev Damasane and Bridget Sayers.
The closing acts for the three days of the online festival featured renowned and award-winning Selmor on the first night, and a highly colourful and energetic performance by popular singer and dancer Sandra Ndebele. The festival closed with the award-winning Ngoma Ingoma delivering a traditional modern urban crossover and highly danceable groove. The festival organising team comprised executive producer Josh Nyapimbe, festival director/producer Saimon Mambazo Phiri, assistant and continuity Nomashawekazi Damasane.
Sound effects and lighting were handled by Sound Kalcha while filming and editing was done by CnC Productions. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Nyapimbe said he was impressed by the outstanding performances, solidarity and a sense of community from all involved. “Organising an event is hard but even harder when performers and crew have to observe social distancing due to the Covid-19 pandemic. “Right now, every online festival shares the same ambition; get smarter about how to connect with audiences online. “As BAF, we’ve inspired pessimism from some armchair critics. Many of the acts we programmed couldn’t hold back their work until next year, when competition will only increase for premiere slots in 2021 BAF Edition. No doubt that we all need to keep getting smarter and faster. “While we all want to get back into theatres, the public is swiftly adapting to watching online content non-stop. Everyone from frontline healthcare workers, artists and cultural professionals alike are finding ways to creatively connect; festivals must, too.” In a remotely recorded address, Coventry congratulated the minister of Bulawayo Metropolitan Province, the mayor of Bulawayo, the Bulawayo City Council, Nhimbe Trust, the festival director, his organising team and the Bulawayo community for ensuring that the inaugural BAF took place online. Speaking on inclusiveness and resilience, she applauded Bulawayo City Council for the set-up of the Bulawayo Cultural Affairs Office, and the cultural cooperation and partnership with Nhimbe Trust. “My ministry, through the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe and National Gallery of Zimbabwe, is a partner and supporter of the Bulwayo Arts Festival.” She said she applauded the people of Bulawayo and all those in the creative cultural industry for being steadfast in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, and wished the festival every success for this year’s edition and all the festivals to come.