Sindiso Mhlophe SENIOR STAFF WRITER mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw ©️  PRESIDENT Emmerson Mnangagwa on Thursday declared June 15 as the Presidential National Day of Prayer and Fasting, as the nation is grappling with the effects of the deadly coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Addressing journalists at State House in the capital, Mnangagwa appealed to Zimbabweans to participate in the national day of prayer amid growing socio-economic challenges as a result of the global pandemic. “Standing on this scripture, I, therefore, proclaim 15 June 2020 as the Presidential National Day of Prayer and Fasting. On this day, from 10 am to 12pm, I invite the whole nation to join me and church leaders from various denominations, via live broadcast, for a church service which I shall host at State House. This comes as the country’s confirmed Covid-19 cases have increased to 320, owing to imported cases coming from returnees, with 49 recoveries and four deaths having been recorded from these cases. Mnangagwa applauded churches for the different ways in which they have assisted the government in the fight against Covid-19. “I wish to acknowledge that our Church leaders are essential personnel in preventing the spread of the coronavirus. Going forward, gatherings for the purpose of worship not exceeding fifty congregants and observing all prescribed social distancing requirements are allowed throughout our nation,” Mnangagwa said.   googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw