Godknows Matarutse SPORTS WRITER matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw ©️ JUST when some established Castle Lager Premiership clubs are reeling from the devastating financial effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, famed Aces Youth Soccer Academy (AYSA) has come out to show them how things are done. The academy, which is based in Waterfalls’ Parktown suburb, and is famed for producing some of the country’s best players in recent years has embarked on an initiative to cushion its players during these trying times by providing them with groceries. AYSA has managed to partner with celebrated Grammy award winning musician Phil Collins in this ephedra, which will help underprivileged young boys and girls from the academy. The development comes at a time some of the PSL teams are being criticised for accepting donations deemed a mockery to their huge status as top flight clubs. Last month, Bulawayo giants Highlanders received 60 bags of 10kg mealie meal and 150kg of rice from an Apostolic sect, while club members, fans and corporate partners also chipped in with an assortment of groceries. Despite being the oldest club in the country and with a huge pedigree, Bosso went to town over these donations and sent out pictures of their star players receiving the packages. Harare giants CAPS United were also bailed out when socialite Wanisai Mutandwa, through her Mahwindo Foundation, donated groceries to the club ranging from salt, sugar, mealie meal and cooking oil, among other things. Just like Bosso, Makepekepe also sold themselves cheap as pictures of their players receiving the groceries went viral on the internet, providing cheap publicity to Mutandwa and her foundation. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); This did not go down well with a lot of people, with some critics denouncing it as a sign of failure by the country’s celebrated clubs. For long, most local teams have heavily relied on gate takings to sustain their operations, which is not a good financial model due to the high costs associated with running a football franchise. The 2020 season should have commenced in March but the coronavirus pandemic saw the government imposing a nationwide lockdown. With no matches taking place, most clubs are now finding it difficult to sustain themselves. However, the step taken by AYSA has acted as a reminder to these established clubs to adopt a more robust commercial approach in running a football club. “The key to effectively running a sporting organisation or any other institution is to make sure you balance the expenditure and your sources of revenue,” AYSA co-director Nigel Munyati told the Daily News. “What we have done is that we managed to secure some funding and we are constantly looking for more and it’s amazing because if I tell you our recent funding, we got from … Collins the musician and his wife. “They run an organisation called Little Dreams Foundations and we are one of the institutions they are supporting financially. “We have adopted a business model; you find that there is not much from placing players locally but of course when you place them abroad, you get something. “But what we do when we place those players is that we re-invest into the Academy because it’s our core business. “We have been closed since March and we decided to buy food for the players so that we sustain and maintain their good health so that when we start, we will just continue from where we left.” Munyati and his co-director Marc Duvillard established the Academy soon after the folding of the Highfield-based former top flight side Black Aces. Current Warriors skipper Knowledge Musona and star forward Khama Billiat are all AYSA graduates. Other notable players to have come through the institution are Abbas and Bret Amidu, George Chigova, Martin Mapisa, Blessing Sarupinda, Emmanuel Jalai, Walter Musona and Wisdom Mutasa.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw