Tendai Kamhungira
and Jeffrey Muvundisi
STAFF WRITERS©️ AUTHORITIES yesterday barred tens of thousands of people from entering Harare’s central business district (CBD) — creating chaos during the morning rush hour in the process, the Daily News reports.  The heightened security — which caught many by surprise — was curiously restricted to the capital city, despite the government saying it was part of efforts to ensure compliance with the national coronavirus lockdown.  The operation came as security forces were said to be on high alert following unrealised reports of planned protests by opposition supporters.  At the same time, Zimbabwe is reeling over the rising cases of coronavirus infections, which jumped from 56 last week to a staggering 203 by yesterday.  Government spokesperson Nick Mangwana told the Daily News that yesterday’s tight security in the capital was part of efforts to fortify the ongoing national lockdown, in the wake of the spiking coronavirus cases.  “There has been no change in the lockdown regulations. The police are simply enforcing the lockdown regulations at level two. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “As you may have noticed, most of our positive cases are imported and people in the communities are self-isolating.  “So, we need to ensure that there is less movement of people because the virus is in our midst,” Mangwana said.
Police national spokesperson Paul Nyathi also told the Daily News that there was nothing unusual about the Harare operation.  “The Zimbabwe Republic Police urges members of the public to observe that the country is still under level two national lockdown in order to manage the Covid-19 pandemic.  “Only essential services, businesses in the formal commercial and industrial sectors were exempted to operate during this period.  “The rest of the public should stay at home in order for the nation to curtail the increase in new Covid-19 cases being recorded,” Nyathi said.  The heightened security saw police and soldiers stopping vehicles and buses from entering central Harare.
Only nurses, security agents, municipal staff, security guards and supermarket workers were allowed passage into the CBD.  Some Zupco buses were also being turned back, creating confusion among commuters and resulting in heavy vehicular congestion on all roads leading into the city centre.  In some cases, police forced some shops in downtown Harare to close and ordered their employees to go home.
Interestingly, while there was chaos in the capital city, it was business as usual in Bulawayo and other towns around the country.  While the usual police check points remained in force in other urban areas, there were no special measures that resulted in people being turned away.  Zimbabwe is currently under an extended lockdown which authorities hope will combat the spread of coronavirus in the country.  As part of fortifying the lockdown, the government has put in place several new regulations, which — among other things — criminalise public gatherings and the non-wearing of face masks in public.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 