Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER 
chayav@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWEAN artists yesterday joined the rest of the world in commemorating Father’s Day, which is celebrated every third Sunday of June to honour the contributions of fathers to society. A number of celebrities took to social media to celebrate fathers.
Towering singer Jah Prayzah said: “Inini namdhara wangu nablaz tirikuda kungoti kumadzibaba ese (Me, my father and my brother would like to say to all the fathers) Happy Father’s Day!” Gospel music diva Fungisai Zvakavapano-Mashavave said: “Celebrating the two distinguished fathers whose leadership has made me the person you celebrate. Hats off to these blessed souls.” Guitarist Tendai Manatsa, son of the great Zexie Manatsa, said: “Happy Father’s Day to the greatest father ever. Thank you for all the sacrifices and battles you fought kuti isu vana venyu titangire pari nani in this life and even in the music industry. Our lives are better because you are a great father. I love you very much.” Backing vocalist Juliet Chivaviro sent her love to hubby: “Happy Father’s Day to you my husband…Toggy Chivaviro. God has given you a task to be a father. The Lord sanctified you for His work; we are blessed to have you. Kwatakabva ndokure, that song Ebenezer you truly told our true story. Ndinoti Ebenezer ndiMwari vatisvitsa pano. You are a Father and an inspiration to many, the Lord will see you through. I love you. God bless you.”
Carl Joshua Ncube: “Charles Palmer Ncube, my late father; my hero, my inspiration. He was a talented woodwork, technical graphics and metalwork teacher. He taught me everything I know creatively. “He made me draw all the time from a very young age. I even remember my dad forcing me to sit for an O’ Level art exam at Gifford High School where he was a teacher, I was eight years old at the time. The work was graded by one of the art teachers and I got a B (I think it was one of his teacher friends anyway). “He constantly believed in me. I remembered a day he absolutely insisted to Madinda Ndlovu that I was ready to try out for Highlanders Juniors at age eight as a goalkeeper. “He was a comedian in his spare time, telling jokes at weddings or working as an MC at events.
“He would constantly take me out with him when chilling with his friends. I would be asked to tell his jokes to his friends so most of my material began as my dad’s jokes then I would always add a few of my own that he would perform at his gigs. “This Father’s Day I just wanted to emphasise the impact this man had on me creatively.
“I didn’t get to spend time with him at home because my parents split up when I was five but those school holidays were a great validation that I could be anything I wanted to be. When I was young he would always ask me the same question ‘China, what do you want to be, sonny boy?’ My answer was always the same ‘I want to be famous!’ googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “My father made me believe in myself, later I didn’t realise it but I would definitely need that self-belief and I am grateful he took the time. “I sorely miss my father but every memory of the time I spent with him was never wasted. Charlie never wasted a single moment with me that he had! People ask why I keep a beard. It is because we live forever as people through our children. “I do everything my father did because I am a result of his genetics. Keeping a beard brings him back to life for me. When I perform my dad’s jokes internationally I see him.”