©️  THE Zimbabwean government is back in the spotlight after the European Union (EU) and the United States (US) slammed President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s administration for allegedly using the police and soldiers in the MDC headquarters takeover, asserting that they are favouring the Thokozani Khupe-led camp.  This comes as MDC-Alliance president Nelson Chamisa and MDC-T leader Khupe are battling for control of the party. The two have been at each other’s throat since the death of the party’s much-loved leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, in February 2018.  The ugly ructions went a notch up on Thursday after Khupe’s group was allegedly assisted by security forces to seize control of the party’s Morgan  Richard Tsvangirai House headquarters.  “This week’s events in #Zimbabwe show a lack of respect for rule of law, due process and constitutional rights: partisan deployment of security forces, arrests, disrespect of property rights, partial investigations, corruption and threats against journalists. #RuleOfLaw #NoZimpunity,” EU in Zimbabwe said on micro blogging site, Twitter.  The development has brought the country back into the international spotlight for the wrong reasons following weeks of condemnation over the alleged abductions of MDC-Alliance officials including Joanna Mamombe, who is Harare West MP.  Mamombe, together with youth assembly vice chair Cecilia Chimbiri and the party’s youth deputy organising secretary Netsai Marowa — recently went missing before they were found in Bindura, amid allegations they had been abducted by State functionaries. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  The State has denied having a hand in the abductions, claiming they were stage-managed.  International organisations condemned the alleged abductions and called for a thorough investigation into the matter.  With the latest developments in the MDC, the US, has added its voice over the manner in which the case was handled.  “We are dismayed by the politicised use of security forces to take over the headquarters of an opposition party and arrest its members. A healthy democracy requires healthy opposition parties.  #PoliticalArrests #AHouseStolen,” the US embassy in Harare, said.  The embassy’s statement comes after that country’s assistant secretary of State for African Affairs Tibor Nagy, raised concern over the same issue.  “The United States condemns the Zimbabwean government’s politicised use of security forces to take over an opposition party’s headquarters and arrest its members.  “This is the latest example of the government of Zimbabwe’s departure from democratic norms and is inconsistent with previous commitments to implement fundamental political and economic reforms,” Nagy said.  The situation in the MDC deteriorated on Friday after the arrest of Chamisa’s deputies Tendai Biti and Lynette Karenyi-Kore, and other officials David Chimhini, Lovemore Chinoputsa, Vongai Tome and Gladys Hlatshwayo, drawing fierce criticism from local and international organisations.  The police said the six had contravened lockdown regulations after they illegally gathered in the central business district.  “Members of the public are urged to continue complying with lockdown measures put in place by the government.  The police and other security services have stepped up operations in enforcing these measures and anyone found disregarding measures put in place will be dealt with in terms of the country’s laws,” police spokesperson Paul Nyathi said.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw 