Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw ©️  THE government is seething with anger after regional powerhouse, South Africa, commented on Zimbabwe’s long-running political and economic crises earlier this week, the Daily News can reveal. This comes after Pretoria’s International Relations minister, Naledi Pandor, was interviewed by the Johannesburg-based Power FM radio station — where she, among other things, urged Zimbabwe’s political players to engage in dialogue. Well-placed sources told the Daily News last night that local authorities — apparently including President Emmerson Mnangagwa — were not impressed by Pandor’s comments, especially her throw-away remark that South Africa was not considering military intervention in the country. “Areas of politics and security come under the direct responsibility of the Sadc Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Co-operation and Zimbabwe is the current chair of this organ. “That gives us the latitude to intervene in Mozambique and to intercede between Zambia and DRC, and also to deal with the Lesotho issue,” another source said. The second source also claimed that this was not the first time that Pandor had spoken out of turn on Zimbabwe.
It was also claimed that Pandor had been organising meetings on Zimbabwe without the approval of either President Cyril Ramaphosa or Mnangagwa — allegedly prompting Ramaphosa to apologise to Mnangagwa on numerous occasions over his minister’s conduct. “Many people have gotten jobs at the United Nations by attacking Zimbabwe. I believe this is one of those situations where people want to be seen speaking up about the country’s situation to get international recognition,” another angry senior government official said. The same official also said it was noteworthy that South Africa had declined to bail out Zimbabwe over the years, in addition to Pretoria imposing many tariffs and non-tariff barriers on the country’s exports, thereby negatively affecting the two countries’ trade. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Speaking to Power FM on Monday, Pandor said Pretoria would not use a hawkish approach to end Zimbabwe’s growing problems. “I think the South African government is in consistent engagement and interaction with the Government of Zimbabwe, both to persuade as well as to provide support where it is needed. “Let me give you an instance of the opposite of our policy … you had Saddam Hussein with respect to Iraq. The decision of (former US president) George W Bush was to use American warfare in Iraqi. “Where is Iraqi today? It is a shell of what it was under what was a dictatorship of (the late Iraqi president Saddam) Hussein,” Pandor said. “We engage consistently. Non-interference means we wouldn’t use our soldiers, our army to invade Zimbabwe, to enforce a platform of democratic practice that we have in South Africa. “We believe that such is a decision that Zimbabwean people must make.
“However, we are able — through diplomatic engagement — to persuade the people of Zimbabwe that they need both political as well as an economic revival, which does mean that they have to change in policy and practice,” Pandor said further. She emphasised that South Africa would continue to encourage dialogue in Zimbabwe.
“It is the political actors who, sitting around the table, will resolve those issues. “South Africa or any other country trying to invade Zimbabwe in the belief that it can resolve the problems will be totally mistaken … this will lead to disaster, and in fact, may turn the people of Zimbabwe against South Africa,” Pandor added.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw