Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zw©️  ZENGEZA West legislator Job Sikhala, pictured,  yesterday came out guns blazing in Parliament demanding Home Affairs minister Kazembe Kazembe to provide him with evidence of his involvement in an alleged coup plot.  This comes after security chiefs last week named him on a list of people who were allegedly spreading rumours of a possible coup to topple President Emmerson Mnangagwa.  The security chiefs recently dismissed talk of the pending military coup, saying they are going to arrest people spreading such messages.  They blamed civil society organisations, preachers and opposition party members, including Sikhala.
Speaking in the National Assembly yesterday, MDC proportional representative Lynette Karenyi-Kore said Kazembe must explain further to legislators on the issue of coup because the message has sent unnecessary panic among Zimbabweans.  In his response, Kazembe Kazembe said the issue is to do with the country’s security and cannot divulge more to the public.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The response did not go down well with Sikhala who angrily demanded the minister to take the matter seriously.  “I have the right to be heard against coup allegations. I want to hear from the minister if he has got evidence against me. This is a serious issue. This House has an oversight role over the Executive. We have the right to know what is happening. This House must know the truth because one of its members was mentioned by the minister.”  Speaker of the National Assembly Jacob Mudenda said he will look into the statement and give the appropriate response.  However, Sikhala demanded the Speaker to provide a timeframe.  “As soon as possible but not more than two weeks,” Mudenda replied.
Recently, Sikhala said that he is a grounded democrat who will never ever buy into coups.  “It was surprising that Kazembe … threatened my person in the company of our National Security Services Chiefs who are the people’s final line of defence. He stated that myself and my exiled brother Saviour Kasukuwere peddle lies about an imminent coup in our country. This statement is not only a lie but delusion of grandeur. I am grounded in the people and believe in people power not any other force,” Sikhala said.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw  