Vasco ChayaLIFESTYLE WRITERchayav@dailynews.co.zwZIMBABWEAN songstress and Amapiano vocalist — Sha Sha — has bagged her very first BET Award for Viewer’s Choice International Act.The Zimbabwean artiste who bagged the “Viewer’s Choice: Best New International Act”  award beat Nigeria’s Rema, Celeste, Young T & Bugsey from the UK and also Hatik and Stacy from France.She is the first Zimbabwean artiste to be nominated for this category.The award ceremony was held virtually due to the pandemic which has enforced social distancing in a lot of countries.Expressing her excitement and disbelief she thanked her supporters back home and worldwide. “What just happened…a BET Thank You! My people back at home…all over the world man,” she tweeted.Sha Sha has made her mark in the entertainment industry and has become a household name. Any Amapiano song which features her vocals become an instant favourite for many music lovers.She is signed under DJ Maphorisa’s record label, and has worked with numerous artistes in the genre including Kabza, Lord Phorry and MFR Souls to name just but a few.Her album Blossom proved to many that she might just be the voice of Amapiano.Yesterday, Zimbabweans from all walks of life took to social media to congratulate the winning diva with comedian Simba Kakore urging the country to appreciate their musicians first before they are appreciated elsewhere.“Sha Sha is a prime example that our artistes have to be approved internationally before they can get local support,” Kakore said.Multi-award-winning musician Jah Prayzah was equally excited by Sha Sha’s achievement.  “I just woke up to the good news. Well done and congratulations Sha Sha. More wins are coming your way and thank you for representing Zimbabwe,” he said.  United Kingdom-based musician Edith WeUtonga thanked people who voted
for the young girl.“What a way to start the week! She bagged it! Our votes counted! Thank you for your votes and shares, it was worth it! Congratulations Shasha!” she said.Nyaradzo Group said: “Congratulations Sha Sha on your well-deserve success. We are excited to see you accomplish great things. Your good deeds inspire our youth who see you as an iconic figure in their
lives.  Today, we celebrate you as well as your success in the Bet Awards 2020. We wish you more success in your career.”The National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (Nacz) also joined the country in celebrating the diva’s achievement. “As Nacz this success did not come as a surprise to the council as we are aware of the amount of hard work and dedication that she has put in her artistic works and we feel that this award is in recognition of her talent and amazing vocal ability.  Any good work will speak for itself, the world has made a determination and we acknowledge the endorsement.“Sha Sha’s sincerity and passionate desire to excel have borne such fruitful results as she kept her dedication firm and did not budge or give up at any time despite various challenges she faced in her artistic journey which today have earned her deserved global recognition,” Nacz director Nicholas Moyo said in a statement yesterday.Moyo added that Sha Sha’s achievement is not only for her but for the country at large.“This award is also an endorsement on the growth and development of the arts sector in Zimbabwe and Africa at large coming so soon after the Zimbabwean Mbira was recently celebrated by global technology firm, Google.“Such global recognition of Zimbabwe arts and culture is testimony that the sector has the potential to contribute significantly to the development of the country.“We truly believe that this award is just the beginning of many such successes in Sha Sha’s career and we wish her all the very best for her future endeavours.  We also call upon other creatives in various sectors to take encouragement from this success to continue with their
creative work despite the various lockdown conditions imposed by the government to limit the spread of the Covid-19 disease,” he said.Meanwhile, Sha Sha joined DJ Maphorisa’s stable in 2018.“After pursuing music professionally and having her singles hit the airwaves in Zimbabwe, the rising start moved to South Africa. She started doing gigs, grew a fan base but things really changed when she was introduced to award-winning producer DJ Maphorisa,” her manager Fungai “Kush” Zvirahwa said.Sha Sha was then featured on songs such as Nge Thanda Wena by the Scorpion Kings and Akulaleki by Samthing Soweto which helped cement her name in the music industry. In November, she dropped her debut studio album Blossom with plug songs such as Tender Love, Something About You and Sing It Back among others. The album is made up of different sounds from Amapiano, pop and afro-beat.“It is this ability to sing across musical genres that keeps her in high demand. Sha Sha was the voice heard across all radio and dance floors in the country (South Africa). The young beauty from Mutare has become a sought-after vocalist in amapiano and it’s no surprise why she won,” Zvirahwa said.  