TAG a Life International (TaLI) — a girls and young women’s rights organisation commemorates the ‘Abused women and children’s Day’, — and notes with concern the overwhelming increase in the cases of gender-based violence (GBV) against women ever since the Covid-19 lockdown. The major victims of this scourge are women and girls while a few cases have included men and boys.
Musasa project recorded a record high the first month of the lockdown. To respond and mitigate the challenge, the young women on the TaLI leadership programme stepped up to provide front line response services to young women, girls and anyone who needed support in the community using online platforms. Using Whatsapp, text messages, phone calls and other social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, the young women and other volunteers have been supporting victims by linking them up with services such as basic counselling, referrals to other services such as the police, shelters depending on the gravity of their issues. The biggest highlight however, of this work during the Covid-19 responses by our young female front liners has been the frustration with the slow response by the police in assisting victims of gender-based violence. While our young women have endeavoured to assist each of the clients with information of what to do when a client suffers gender-based violence, the feedback from clients has been disheartening. Upon reporting, some of the victims reported to us how they are being asked by the police to go back home and bring the perpetrator. Others are told that the police do not have vehicles to go and get the offender. More are told that they can go back and resolve their issues or that the perpetrator ‘anonetsa uyu’ the perpetrator is troublesome. This latter notion demonstrate how our police have failed women sometimes befriend perpetrators at the expense of the plight of women. The Covid-19 task-force has since acknowledged that there has been a steep increase in the violence recorded against women and girls since the lockdown, however, not much resources has been put to mitigate gender-based violence. Women continue to suffer and are desperate for services. Perpetrators continue to violate women and girls because they know nothing will be done to them, while those who are also watching are encouraged to violate their women as they see fellow men walk-free even as they violate their wives or any female relations. This has however, in other cases discourage women and girls to report abuse cases as they either become more mocked for attempting to report the men to the police or they are stigmatised as victims of abuse. TaLI therefore joins the many voices in calling for gender responsive mechanism in crisis like Covid-19, to ensure that services providers are equipped and are professional in handling gender–related issues. We call on the government to ensure that the police take these issues seriously. We encourage women to report cases to the police. We encourage members of the public to also have a non-tolerance for the abuse of women and assist women and girls to reach out for services. The following are messages from some of our young women Front Line Responders assisting girls and young women who are going through abuse. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Working as a Frontline Rapid Responder is good and challenging as l sometimes feel the victims aren’t getting enough help. l try by all means to help people that are experiencing gender based violence and l can safely say it’s a nice feeling to help someone as most of them will be feeling lost …..” Sinikiwe Paidamoyo Vela About Tag a Life International Vision We envision a safe world where girls and young women are free to dream, empowered to become whatever they want to be. A world where girls can make social and economic choices, free without negative influences from others but rather with community support. We envision a world where girls and boys are treated equally in every aspect of life, a world where children or young people will be allowed to be themselves enjoying their equal rights.
Mission To create a safe place for the girls and young women through building their agency and voice, so that they may create movements, as well as engaging boys, men, communities and leaders to addressing gender norms advancing their rights. Strategy TaLI is the convener of the Every Child In School — ECISI Campaign, a campaign that advocated for access to free state-funded education. Through this campaign policies and laws have been put in place namely The Secretary’s Circular 3 of 2019 and the Education Amendment Act of 2019. We also pride ourselves in raising young women and girls leaders through our leadership Economic Mentorship Hubs — (LEMHs), a one-year leadership programme. We have also always supported victims of sexual abuse especially girls and young women through the provision of basic counselling and linking them with services.