Tinashe Sibanda
Lifestyle writer
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw ZIMDANCEHALL singer Carrington Chiwadzwa popularly known as Nutty O has dropped a new track titled My Time (Not Sorry). Nutty O teamed up with Rodney “Rymez” Hwingwiri to compose the track off an upcoming project Pungwe Sessions Volume II which is set to be released in full on June 5. Following the recent release of the track, Nutty O said: “I do not know how to explain this. But this is one the most magical musical collaborations that has ever happened.” Floating effortlessly over the Rymez-produced song, Nutty O makes it known that he is still making hit songs.
The single which is destined for the top is the fourth release from the Pungwe Sessions Volume II. “My Time has been added to several popular international playlists such as the global New Music Daily Playlist and Hot Tracks,” said the musician’s Publicist Phil Chard. He added that in 2014, Point Black and its African Hip Hop Blog brand partnered with Rymez on a project called Pungwe Sessions with the goal to showcase Zimbabwe’s best hip-hop talent by leveraging The African Hip Hop blogs. The first single titled Phil Chiyangwa by Jnr Brown held the top spot on the ZiFM Urban Chart for 10 weeks and three more singles were released from the EP. “All four singles on The Pungwe Sessions charted (sic) on various radio stations in Zimbabwe and they have been on play- lists on various radio stations in Zimbabwe, South Africa, Zambia, Namibia, Australia and, the USA as well as playlisting on two seasons of the Big Brother Africa reality show,” said Chard. He added that musicians involved with the project were able to draw direct economic benefits from the project via publishing royalties and performance bookings. With Pungwe Sessions Vol. II which is supported in partnership with Goethe-Zentrum Harare/ Zimbabwe German Society, Point Black is looking to follow up on the success of the first project and create more impact for the artists involved. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The project is a collaborative album that hopes to elevate Zimbabwean musicians via education, collaboration and promotion,” said Chard. Nutty O is known for his songs Boom Shelele and Dakufara Nhasi among others.