HARARE – Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) are set to get back to basics by reintroducing the national league in an effort to bring competitive edge to club cricket as well as bridging the gap between school and clubs, an official told the Daily News yesterday. Club cricket gave birth to some of the country’s finest players to wear the famous Chevrons jersey among them former captains Tatenda Taibu, Hamilton Masakadza, batsmen Vusi Sibanda and Stuart Matsikenyeri among others. With virtually little or nothing to play for, the country’s top flight club cricket has been reduced to child’s play with senior national and provincial franchise cricketers playing just for fun. The majority of them attend matches where they only bat and leave without taking part in fielding. ZC acting-managing director Givemore Makoni said the league will be pencilled for late winter to summer featuring eight or 10 teams from the country’s leagues dotted across every province. “What we are looking to do is to reintroduce the national league which will be made up of teams that finish tops in provincial club cricket leagues. Ideally Harare Metro’s top three teams will qualify for national league, two from Bulawayo then we will have a team from Kwekwe another one from Masvingo and Midlands to make up eight. “If we finally settle for 10 teams then we will increase the Harare teams to four and Bulawayo to three. These will make up the national league which will be played during late winter into summer,” Makoni told the Daily News yesterday. “We want to bridge the gap between schools cricket and first class cricket. You will notice that a lot of our players when they finish school there isn’t much competitive club cricket that they play, we also want to bring competitiveness at club level. You cannot sustain any first class structure without a competitive club structure.” As was the case in yesteryear where ZC provided much of the necessities needed for club cricket to flourish, Makoni concurred they will be providing some of the basic stuff to ensure that club cricket is played around the country without hindrances. “Now that we have dealt with most of our financial issues I think now we should channel resources and ensure that we have a competitive national league club structure. We intend to make this club competition very lucrative and attractive so we are trying to find a sponsor to partner with so that we have good prize money for the clubs,” added Makoni. “We will also be providing cricket balls and bats. Those are some of the things that we will be providing for the club competition. In terms of ground maintenance we would expect the clubs to maintain their own facilities and in terms of transport we also expect the clubs to provide their own transport but some of the basic stuff that is required for club competitions ZC will be providing especially at national league level. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The beauty about a vibrant club cricket system is that it exposes a lot of upcoming players from various clubs other than just the national team players. It increases competition at club level because there’s motivation to play for and as a result provincial teams will also be strong and have more player base to select from, automatically the first class structure will be stronger. Ultimately quality players will be produced for the national teams.”