©️  UNDER pressure Finance minister Mthuli Ncube has once again admitted that the government is struggling to fix Zimbabwe’s deepening economic crisis, the Daily News reports. This comes as the hapless Zim dollar, which Ncube ill-advisedly re-introduced last year, continues to plunge on the parallel market — causing the prices of basic consumer goods in the country to run amok. It also comes after he recently wrote a letter to international financial institutions, in which he candidly admitted that the local economy was close to collapse. In a briefing to Parliament last week, Ncube said the ever skyrocketing prices of basic goods in the country were a result of the plummeting local currency on the black market — adding that this was proving difficult to deal with. “I am sure you have also noticed that every time we arrest people and we close their accounts, the rate goes down, and that shows that there is something not right that they are doing. That is what we are trying to investigate,” he added. Ncube also said the government would be appealing to business anew, in a bid to get them to reduce the prices of basic goods. He also said the RBZ’s Financial Intelligence Unit should do more to ensure that cash barons were brought to book.     Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw