Godknows Matarutse
in BINDURACORONAVIRUS (Covid-19) social distancing protocols were completely thrown out of the window as thousands converged at Chipadze Stadium to bid farewell to the late former Dynamos assistant coach Biggie Zuze yesterday.  The normally sleepy town of Bindura was turned into a blue sea as hordes of DeMbare fans joined the Mashonaland Central public to pay their last respects to Zuze, who passed away last Thursday after succumbing to a pulmonary (lung) clot in Harare.  Due to the novel virus, public gatherings including funerals should only be attended by not more than 50 people with social distancing being observed.  However, droves of people from all over the country made their way to the venue to view Zuze’s body one last time.
It was a fitting moment considering that the former DeMbare midfielder’s career began at Chipadze where he launched his illustrious football career with Bindura United in the 70s.  After the speeches and body viewing, the procession made its way from Chipadze to Chiwaridzo Cemetery.  Along the way, people lined up the streets to get a final glimpse of the cortege while mourners danced and sang to the chants of “Mashonaland Central Hero”.  Even at the cemetery, the large crowd was still there.
Among those in attendance included football personalities, business people, politicians and the general public.  The entire DeMbare squad and technical team led by coach Tonderai Ndiraya was also in attendance as well as members of the executive committee and board.  Zifa board member Sugar Chagonda, communications manager Xolisani Gwesela and technical director Wilson Mutekede were also in attendance.  The likes of David Mandigora, Clayton Munemo, Taurai Mangwiro, Nesbert Saruchera, Alfred Chinodakufa, Joseph Takaringofa, Newsome Mutema and George Jojo were all in attendance.    
Bindura Mayor Carlos Tokyo as well as businessman and politician Stan Kasukuwere also joined the mourners to pay their last respects.  Those who spoke to the Daily News at the graveside described Zuze’s death as a huge loss to Mashonaland Central and the country in terms of football development.  After hanging up his boots, the former DeMbare midfielder developed into a respected coach with a keen interest on junior football.  Zuze also had successful coaching stints with teams like Monomotapa, Triangle United, Gunners, Douglas Warriors, BN Academy and Sporting Cubs.  Zuze’s uncle, Petros Katanha, lauded people from Bindura and across the country for providing a befitting send-off for his nephew.  “I’m humbled by the support we got from the people from the province and the country at large,” Katanha told the Daily News.  “Zuze contributed a lot to the development of football in the province. Biggie helped a lot of teams from this province.”  Zuze’s childhood friend and neighbour Bernard Mutserenga described the departed Dynamos assistant coach as a hero.  “He is a hero. He put this province on the map. He was very humble and accommodative,” Mutserenga told the Daily News.  Zifa chairperson for Mash Central Gilbert Saika concurred with Mutserenga saying: “He was a very rare talent. He played when talent was in abundance and for him to make the grade at Dynamos was not a mean achievement, it speaks volume of who he truly was.”