Bernard Chiketo
in MUTARE©️  THE Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) wants to evict 100 villagers in Wengezi, Manicaland, saying they were illegally resettled 36 years ago in a military cantonment.  In a letter to the villagers in possession of the Daily News, 3 Brigade commander, Brigadier General George Chitsva, gave the Rufuka Village 14B residents until June 30 to leave the area or face eviction.  “You are expected to comply by vacating the cantonment area by June 30, 2020 or face forceful removal. Please cooperate and comply,” reads the letter dated May 7, but delivered to the villagers last week.
Chitsva said the army was allocated the land in 2003.   But a representative of the villagers, Stephen Choto, said they were shocked by the army move as they were resettled by the government in 1984.  He said each family was allocated 12-acre plots and they had even built a primary school in the area. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “We were settled here around 1984 legally and it came as a shock that the army is now saying the area was gazetted in 2003 and we were never informed of any such development,” Choto said.  Choto said they were concerned that they would be bullied off their land and were yet to consult the Lands ministry on the development.   “We are hoping to engage them on what really is happening because as far as we are concerned this is our land and the army has their own space away from here,” he said.  The army, however, claimed the villagers settled themselves in the area.  “Take note that you have no right at law to settle yourself in the gazetted area,” the letter claimed.
“Zimbabwe National Army is set to conduct some military training in the area and your presence will negatively affect the smooth flow of military activities.  “Furthermore, you expose yourself and your family to potential danger from military activities that may be undertaken in the cantonment from time to time.”   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw  