Tendai Kamhungira
DEPUTY CHIEF WRITER
kamhungirat@dailynews.co.zw ©️  HARARE was once again hit by chaotic scenes yesterday, after security forces stopped tens of thousands of people from entering the central business district (CBD) — as the country held its day of national prayer, the Daily News reports. Not for the first time, the heightened security was curiously restricted to the capital city — amid swirling speculation that authorities were on high alert for mass protests by the opposition. This comes as political tensions are rising worryingly in the country, amid an ever worsening economic climate. But national police spokesperson Paul Nyathi told the Daily News yesterday that there was nothing unusual about the high security presence in Harare, which he maintained was in line with the current national lockdown regulations. Expanding on the issue further, Nyathi said security deployments depended on each day’s assessments by law enforcement agents. Apart from searching vehicles, the security forces also turned away many people, including those allowed by the law to be at work. In contrast, in Bulawayo and other towns, Daily News crews there said it was business as usual. Only a few roads leading into city centres in these urban areas had police check points. Zimbabwe is currently under a relaxed, but indefinite lockdown — which authorities hope helps to combat the spread of coronavirus in the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Meanwhile, political analysts said yesterday the stepped up security betrays the government’s fears of civil unrest, due to the worsening economic rot. Another political analyst, Maxwell Saungweme, echoed the same sentiments, saying yesterday’s heavy security presence in Harare was part of authorities’ plan to stop protests. “The situation is pregnant with frustration, anger, hunger and restiveness among the people.
“It’s ironic … to declare a national day of prayer and then bar people from going to places of worship of their choice in town. “It’s all politics, nothing religious. It has nothing to do with prayer and fasting,” Saungweme told the Daily News.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw