MAXWELL SIBANDA ALICK Macheso, band leader of Orchestra Mberikwazvo turned 52 on Wednesday and what a milestone for the sungura bassist and singer. Having dropped out of secondary school owing to lack of funds Macheso moved to Harare in 1982, searching for employment. The search for work was frustrating for him and the sungura ace decided to try music by joining Vhuka Boys.
After a short stint at Vhuka Boys, Macheso joined hands with Nicholas Zacharia aka Madzibaba and formed the Khiama Boys. Riding on a wave of inspiration from yesteryear greats like Jonah Moyo, Leonard Dembo (late) and the late Marshall Munhumumwe and the Four Brothers, he turned solo in 1998 and released his debut album, Pakutema Munda to critical acclaim. He went on to release another album Magariro a year later — which launched his fast sungura music beat.
What followed after his the Magariro album were magical moments. He was arguably the best-selling musician in Zimbabwe from 1999 up to around 2003 with assertive releases like Vakiridzo, Simbaradzo, Zvakanaka Zvakadaro and Zvido Zvenyu Kunyanya. All those years won countless accolades which include Best Selling Album awards presented at Tinotenda Siyabonga Music Awards, TSAMA and the National Arts Council Merit Awards, NAMA. An energetic dancer, Macheso ranks among the best bass guitarists in the land.
Macheso owes his bass playing prowess to a number of great musicians he has played with in the past including Shepherd Chinyani, Tineyi Chikupo and Cephas Karushanga. As the Red Cross Society of Zimbabwe (RCSZ) Ambassador, Macheso has travelled the breadth and width of the country, penetrating marginalised rural communities where he has been able to identify needy and desperate people. The music star believes Zimbabweans should view themselves as the new donors so they do not rely entirely on donor assistance. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); With the assistance of RCSZ the singer has sourced blankets, food, medicines and wheel chairs which he has donated throughout the country. In Chitungwiza, Macheso has managed to solicit building materials and paint for three houses that were destroyed during the infamous Chitungwiza blast of 2014. The singer is also so passionate about Chitungwiza Hospital and has coordinated fund-raising concerts on their behalf. He has been to Ngomahuru, an institute for the mentally challenged.
Apart from donating various goodies to the old, he has embarked on a new philanthropic journey of sourcing skin lotions for the albino community. The Daily News on Sunday caught up with his fellow musicians and fans who conveyed their messages while also choosing what they thought were some of the singer’s best three songs. Zora music star Leonard Zhakata said he has so much respect for Macheso.
“He is a great entertainer, a friend of the people, so hard working. We thank the Lord for his life, he has inspired far too many and I pray for the Lord to grant him long life. Good compositions from him are too many but I pick Pakutema Munda, Shedia and Zvakanaka Zvakadaro.” Singer Okay Machisa said: “I wish the sungura guru more than 100 years. At 52 most musicians become assertive and their productions develop deep and mature messages. This is Baba Shero for us. Congratulations mdara and for me paKukupa Gungwa you meant business followed by Tafadzwa Nyarara and Petunia.” Celebrated writer Virginia Phiri said Macheso is one of the most humble musicians whose music cuts across cultures. “One must also note that even before becoming a Red Cross Ambassador Macheso was already a philanthropist in vulnerable communities. I wish him a Happy 52nd Birthday, prosperity and good health. “My favourite song is Mai waRubhi.”
Gospel music star Charles Charamba lauded Macheso as a distinguished musician. “He is a complete music person who does not release for the sake of it. Macheso is a creator par excellence who has done much in sustaining a distinct genre of sungura which has grown to be a music culture on its own. Much respect for him and his wife. I love…Pandakarumwa nembwa dzekwavo zvakakusetsai and …Sarah iwe, Sarah iwe…May the Lord continue to preserve him.” Singer Victor Kunonga said: “I wish the legend Macheso many more years. It’s not just the music he gives us but his humility. He inspires many.” Music producer and guitarist Mono Mukundu: “Macheso is the most imitated sungura artist in the history of music in Zimbabwe. His bass strumming, his stage theatrics, his voice, even chirimi chake chaicho has been imitated over and over again. Hakuna anokopa dofo, which means this man is a genius, a pacesetter, the one responsible for sungura invading the Dale-Dales.” Mbira songstress Tendai Mavengeni said: “Great artist he is. I learnt that he also plays mbira. He is one guy who doesn’t forget where he came from. Happy birthday to him and my favourite three songs from him are Monalisa, Mundikumbuke and Zvakanaka Zvakadaro.” Austria-based singer Vusa Makhaya: “My message to Macheso is that he should keep on keeping on and lead by example. I am proud to live in a time where musicians like him still appreciate, play and love organic music. No play backs, no auto tune and no tricks. My favourite songs from him are Mundikumbuke, Mwari Wenyasha and Madhawu.” RCSZ’s communications officer Takemore Mazuruse said he had the privilege to work with Macheso since 2013 when he was engaged as RCSZ Humanitarian Ambassador. “Macheso is one of the most genuine and real people I have known and his love for others is just amazing. I have toured Zimbabwe on humanitarian missions and in all this he has demonstrated undying commitment to serve. “As he celebrates his birthday, I just want to wish him the best life has to offer. May he continue to entertain, inspire and assist! Like the wise posit, there is no better calling than to serve others and he must never tire in doing good.”
Mazuruse said his favourite three songs from Macheso’s discography include Raramiro, Petunia and 1940. “All his songs are pregnant with meaning but those three take the trophy for me. Happy birthday..one chigure chinovharisa dhanzi. Zikomo kwambiri.” “May you be gifted with life’s biggest joys and never-ending bliss. After all, you yourself are a gift to earth, so you deserve the best. Happy birthday, we wish you love, hope and everlasting joy and happiness, whatever you ask may you receive, whatever you seek may you find, whatever you wish may it be fulfilled on your birthday and always. Happy birthday our Humanitarian Ambassador! My favourite songs are Shedia, Raramiro and Mwari Wekudenga; quite difficult to single the songs as all are just chart busters, loaded with meaning and entertaining.” A music fan Ranga Mberi said: “It’s hard to pick top three songs from Macheso, but I would say Charakupa, Shedia, Mwari Wenyasha. My message to him is that ‘You are one of the true greats of sungura and indeed Zimbabwean art and culture in general. May you keep inspiring us with your words and your rhythms!’” Another fan, Veronica Mapanzura said: “Macheso, you are such a remarkable talent. Pakutema Munda is my old time favourite. Chikuru Kurarama resonates with me as a feminist. Don’t force love; don’t physically abuse anyone in the name of love. Kudzwai just makes me praise my Maker for what my life is today.”