Blessings Mashaya and Mugove Tafirenyika SENIOR STAFF WRITERS ©️  INDEPENDENT Norton legislator Temba Mliswa lost his cool in Parliament on Thursday after he was chastised by deputy National Assembly Speaker Tsitsi Gezi for disrespecting fellow MPs, the Daily News can report. Mliswa resorted to using some unprintable words towards Zanu PF MP for Seke, Munyaradzi Kashambe, who had raised a point of privilege alleging that the former ruling party chairperson for Mashonaland West Province was being given preferential treatment in Parliament. “My point of privilege is to do with the unequal treatment of Members of Parliament when they want to debate, especially from that Chair. “We have a member, Temba Mliswa, who is allowed to say whatever he wants, when he wants to and at whatever time. He even goes as far as criticising our ministers or leader of the House without being recognised by the Speaker. He even accused the Speaker of being corrupt, but nothing was done,” Kashambe said. A visibly angry Mliswa stood up waiting to be recognised on a point of order before Gezi ordered him to take his seat. Mliswa shouted amid inaudible interjections from the House. However, this did not deter Mliswa, who remained standing, much to the annoyance of Gezi who ordered him for the second time to take his seat. This did not go down well with Mliswa, who shouted some unprintable words, accusing fellow lawmakers of insulting him. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He was duly reprimanded by Gezi who ruled that Mliswa’s conduct was unparliamentary and that he be ejected from the House. Mliswa was duly escorted out of the chamber. After Mliswa was escorted out of the House, Gezi said members must show good behaviour. “Members, I think it is important that if we are chosen by the people we should show mature behaviour and as we are heads of families in our homes. We should not behave like street kids, it is not good,” Gezi said. Kashambe added that Mliswa’s behaviour affected other members such that they no longer had the confidence to stand up in the House and debate. “He stands up on any occasion and says whatever he wants, even to the Vice President, other members of Parliament and the Leader of the House… Also, some ministers are failing to come to Parliament, which is hampering the business of this House because there is no one who reprimands him,” he said. Gezi said Parliament would investigate the matter. “Kashambe, I have heard your complaint. I think we will sit down as presiding officers and the administration of Parliament. We will tackle the issue, investigate and come out with a position. Thank you,” she said. Zanu PF Proportional Representative legislator Goodlucky Kwaramba also complained about Mliswa’s behaviour. “As women Speaker, we are not happy with what we have observed in Parliament. “The way he insulted you really touched us as women and we are not happy.  So I am pleading with you to do something about the behaviour that we have witnessed here in Parliament,” Kwaramba said.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw