By ONWARD GANGATA REGGAE singer Joseph Tatenda Tawanda Nhara aka Man Soul Jah is a bitter man who after releasing 11 albums has nothing to show.
Even working as Station Manager at ZBC did not change his fortunes.
In 2002, Man Soul Jah was appointed as head at the then 3FM later to be rebranded Power FM.
His appointment came at a time government decentralised the radio stations at ZBC, which resulted in the urban driven radio station relocating to Gweru.
For someone who for years had fought to have his music played on radio without any success, managing Power FM gave him the chance to change the order.
“I started my musical journey soon after independence in 1982 in Gweru with a group called Mystic Power, but went solo in 1989, and from 1989 to 2000, I was a victim of bad, evil and cruel radio presenters and DJs who wanted to be paid a fee to play your music,”  the singer recalled.  “They played second rate musicians who gave them some money; it was never about uplifting the local artists, the attitude of radio DJs was bad, devilish if I may say because they competed with artists; in 1995 I recorded my second album Soul Contact at David Scoobie’s studio, sadly the DJs said it was too international and it was stifled.
“It was heart breaking considering the producer (Scoobie) had described the album as 10 years ahead of its time, that’s how good it was instead the people at radio said they would rather play international artists than a local musician who sounded international.”
Man Soul Jah joined Power FM at the same time that government introduced a 75 percent local content; that ensured the station strictly played local music, giving rise to the urban grooves movement.
“I found myself in a position of authority and implemented the 75 percent local content which I increased to 100 percent at my station; that was the only way I had to change the attitudes of the DJs then, and it gave rise to the urban grooves movement.”
He later left ZBC in 2015 and does not regret serving as station manager with the broadcaster being accused of supporting Zanu PF.
Despite the apparent neglect from the party since losing his job at ZBC in 2015, he also has nothing to show for his broadcasting services.
“My fellow comrades in Zanu PF have been watching me being tossed around ever since I lost my job in 2015, I don’t have a farm, or a mining claim. I have been reduced to an ordinary man on the street, no one cares to look at how I am doing but such is life, I still cherish the service I gave” he said.
He believes after successfully fighting hard for recognition of local artistes during his days in broadcasting, he selflessly put his career at a halt, and did not push for his own music to get airplay as it would have been conflict of interest, hoping his time would come one day, sadly radio has gone rogue again and turned against him.
His voice breaks as he explains, so he pauses, struggling to contain his emotions, tears welling up in his eyes. He stares at the ceiling in his sitting room so as to avoid tears from flowing down his cheeks.
“And here I am today…11 albums later, still I am where I was in 1989, having to beg the people at radio stations to play my music, if you’re from outside Harare it’s difficult to get airplay these days, how much of my music do you hear from local stations, how much?” he thunders.
“Take my music to any renowned artist, even Thomas Mapfumo they won’t find any error in my music, but I have to beg an upstart DJ to play my music because he or she has to be paid, that’s so insulting, for years I put my head on the block changing radio, I even had some who were bad presenters but I saved their jobs, is this how they pay me back?”  Man Soul Jah, 56 was born in Zvishavane. The singer is a bubbly character who confidently asserts that he is the leading reggae Rastafarian musician in the country; and goes a step further to claim his music is better than that of the late South African artist Lucky Dube.
Apart from his 2000 release,  Mr Government man and an odd tour to Europe with his People Against Cruel Existence (Pace) band at the turn of the millennium, he has not set the stage alight locally.
As of now there isn’t much to show for all his talents; in fact the Gweru-based musician has been forced to go into musical hibernation.
He is in the process of rebuilding his PA system after losing his entire sound system in an accident sometime back, and says he has an album ready for recording but is financially incapacitated to do so.
“The radio system in this country has denied me my fullest economic opportunity because they are shutting me out, as a result I can’t record my new album because I do not have neither the means nor the funds to do so, instead, I will keep playing my music, one day it will find the ears and it will grow and grow,” the singer said.