©️ NON-Governmental Organisations and United Nations agencies have partnered with Harare City Council to repair and rehabilitate the city’s aged water distribution network in various suburbs.  According to recent environmental management committee minutes, Unicef, Oxfam, VEI, Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ) and Welthungerhilfe (WHH) have undertaken to fix boreholes and infrastructure rehabilitation.
The city has been dogged with outbreaks of waterborne diseases caused by lack of water and aged infrastructure that exposed people to various disease causing bacteria. The acting director of Harare Water further reported that capacity tests for a possible 12 boreholes were conducted and of those, five boreholes had a yield of less than 2 500 litres per hour (l/h) which was smaller yield for an upgrade into a solar powered system. The water points that had a yield of at least 2 500l/h and above and were equipped to mini solar powered systems,” read part of the minutes.
The minutes noted that certain communities with boreholes that had the capacity to be upgraded to solar power refused to upgrade, while some residents were maintaining municipal boreholes themselves.
Council resolved that all boreholes were to be placed on Geographical Information System (GIS) for easy mapping and location. The project estimated to cost US$300 000 would see the fitting and installing of 2 000 water meters, replacement of six kilometres of water pipes and the unblocking of sewers. Meanwhile, Harare City Council Environmental Management Committee chairperson Kudzai Kadzombe said the $26 million they got from Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara) was not enough for repairs and maintenance of roads they had earmarked for the year. “Disbursements from Zinara amounting to $26 million were inadequate to cover five roads in each of the 46 wards envisaged under the proposed Memorandum of Agreement with the Harare Quarry (Pvt) Ltd…we submitted the final draft for consideration and are awaiting to get their response,” Kadzombe said. A 2018 report by the Urban Councils Association of Zimbabwe (Ucaz) revealed that very few local authorities have adequate road infrastructure. The report based on service delivery benchmarking stated that only 21,2 percent of roads in the 32 urban councils were in good condition. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Ucaz emphasised the need for more resources to be channelled towards roads maintenance if the roads were to be trafficable.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 