Austin Karonga
SPORTS WRITER
karongaa@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWE batsman Brendan Taylor is overjoyed after finally returning to training last week after a long lay-off due to the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. The government imposed a lockdown in March and banned any participation in sports as a measure to contain the spread of the novel virus. The measures were recently relaxed and cricket is one of the medium risk sports allowed to resume but with strict health guidelines being followed. With Afghanistan scheduled to tour the country in August, Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) has organised the players into groups according to their locations with training now taking place at various centres across the country. After a decent display in Bangladesh albeit in Zimbabwe’s defeat before the lockdown the former national team captain earned himself a place in the World that was scheduled to square off against Asia XI. The games, however, were cancelled just a week after being announced and any potential new dates are yet to be availed. “It is an overwhelming feeling, to even be considered part of the world 11 is a real honour,” Taylor said of his selection. He is backing himself to bounce back to top form when international cricket resumes. “The reality is that one off series doesn’t make you a bad player, it’s a tough place to play and I’m pretty happy with my record in Bangladesh,” added Taylor. “The recipe to achieving that is practice, practice, practice. That eases the mind knowing you have prepared to your fullest. “Of course everyone is entitled to his opinion, every player will have that, the positive thing is that 90 percent of the supporters are very encouraging and I truly appreciate that. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “It’s important not to read into the critics because it will consume you so generally (during lockdown) trying to work closely with my kids, whether that’s homework, playing games, swimming and running. I’m to incorporate them into my fitness schedule too.” 