Jeffrey Muvundusi in BULAWAYO ©️  MORE health workers yesterday went on strike over poor pay and working conditions, the Daily News reports. This saw doctors and nurses in Bulawayo joining the industrial action that began in Harare on Wednesday — badly affecting services at Mpilo Central, Ingutsheni Central and United Bulawayo Hospitals. This comes as the government is battling to provide its health workers with adequate personal protective equipment (PPE), amid increasing cases of the lethal coronavirus infections in the country. The strike also came barely 24 hours after the government had awarded all public sector workers and pensioners US dollar allowances. Yesterday, the secretary-general of the Zimbabwe Nurses Association (Zina), Enock Dongo, told the Daily News that they had resolved to withdraw their services nationally with immediate effect — due to “our worsening plight”. He also said they had since submitted a letter to the Health Services Board (HSB), detailing their grievances, and which they hoped would be attended to as a matter of urgency in the interest of the country’s dysfunctional public health sector. Heath and Child Care minister Obadiah Moyo was not picking up calls yesterday. All this comes as Zimbabwe is grappling with Covid-19, which has so far killed four people and infected more than 400 others. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); While doctors and nurses have complained of inadequate PPE, as well as poor pay and allowances, the Daily News reported exclusively in April how fat cats at the HSB were living it up. Then, the HSB bigwigs controversially awarded themselves hefty additional allowances, at a time that frontline health workers were getting measly salaries and incentives. The allowances came hard on the heels of deliveries to HSB bosses and other high ranking government officials of top-of-the-range vehicles. The hefty allowances also came at a time the government had been ordered by the High Court to provide health workers PPE among other essentials, in the fight against Covid-19.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw