ZIMBABWE-BORN Australian singer Takudzwa Victoria Rosa, popularly known as Tkay Maidza, is currently making waves following the release of her recent track titled Shook. On May 29, popular British media outlet The Guardian reviewed Maidza’s Shook alongside United States musician Katy Perry’s Daisies and Slothai’s Enemy among others on their Tracks of the Week Reviewed platform. Said the review: “This song is art. You can tell by the interpolation of the Drop It Like It’s Hot riff, you can tell by the Missy Elliott Back When She Was Great beat, and you can tell because the video is in a 21:9 aspect ratio: the official AR of art. “Pop it on headphones for one of your daily walks; it’s as close as you’re going to get to the sweaty, ear-drum bursting, shouting-your-drinks-order dance floor experience that we’re all craving right now.” According to yet another review by New Music Express (NME), another British music journalism website and former magazine that has been publishing since 1952, Tkay Maidza has made a splashy return with the music video for her new single, Shook — her first release on her new label 4AD. They wrote that Shook is the Adelaide rapper’s first release since her 2019 singles, IDC if u be ded and the Jpeg Mafia-assisted Awake.
In an NME interview Maidza is quoted saying: “I’m starting to feel more confident in my skills.”
Its accompanying video, which was directed by Jenna Marsh, was shot in a scrapyard before the coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown.
“It kind of picks up conceptually where the Awake video left off, but goes into a different place,” said Maidza after NME asked her what it was like to make the video for Shook. She told NME that it was a really long, extensive process. She has not been as involved in the creative process of her videos thus far as she has on this one. She said it took careful planning, which made the difference because instead of rushing into the production, she made at least three different mood boards over a few months, just to make sure the visual element was articulated well. “Visuals are so important to me and this was the definition of ‘trust the process’. The end product was really well done and I think a lot of it was due to great timing and persistence,” she said. “I had the concept that after this ‘weird year’ I experienced, I was propelled into the future where everything has basically fallen apart. Hence the junkyard setting, and the Angel and Devil characters representing the courage and doubts I face along the way as I’m trying to find my way back to civilisation.” She added that a lot of her career has been reactive and she does not always view the content she put out earlier as consistent because she was young. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Maidza said it was fun, but creating a story and context that can be followed throughout a career gives her focus and a direction; plus more for other people to hold on to. “I feel like I have grown up, I have started to understand and hone in on my creative vision and identity and this has been the goal since 2016 and it’s only now that I’m starting to feel more confident in my skills,” she said.