Vasco Chaya STAFF WRITER chayav@dailynews.co.zw  ©️ THE Zimbabwe Schools Examination Council (Zimsec) ‘O’ and ‘A’ Levels mid-year local examinations have been set for June 30 to July 23, the Daily News can report. This comes as schools are currently closed in line with the coronavirus national lockdown measures, but the government said they would be re-opened in five phases, starting with examination classes by end of this month. “The June 2020 examination session for the Ordinary and Advanced Level has been scheduled as follows: Ordinary level — Tuesday June 30 to Monday July 20; Advanced Level — Tuesday June 30 to Thursday July 23,” Zimsec board chair Eddie Mwenje said in a statement last night. Mwenje said the revised provisional examination timetables were sent to all examination centres across the country. “An extended registration period for the November 2020 session has been opened up and will close on June 25. “The extended registration period will accommodate the candidates who failed to meet the deadline for the registration for the November examinations and candidates who wish to add or delete subjects from their initial registration,” Mwenje said. The extended registration would also accommodate candidates who partially registered, but failed to pay full examination fees and wish to top up. “It also applies to the private candidates who initially registered as candidates from government or government aided schools who wish to normalise their registration and top up their examination fees.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); During the examinations, schools have been ordered to enforce, maintain and observe Covid-19 mitigatory measures. “The examination material from Zimsec will be delivered while observing the mitigatory measures for the spread of the coronavirus. More stand-alone centres will be created to minimise movement and contact between administrators from different centres. “Examination centres are to observe the minimum one metre distance between candidates’ desks. Heads of Examination Centres are required to put in place and enforce the measures that curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic as directed by the government through Statutory Instrument 099,” Mwenje said. Teachers unions and health experts have advised the government not to re-open schools until the coronavirus curve has been flattened. They argue that government would not be able to supply protective equipment, sanitisers, enforce social distancing and employ more teachers.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw