BUSINESSWOMAN and former model Debbie Mubi, 52 has seen it all in the local showbiz first as a model with Zollies, appearing as Mahogany Cover Girl and being Edgar’s face for almost two years. Together with her husband they run the popular Harare Night Club, Londoners.
Apart from Londoners she also runs Londoners Bottlestore, Londoners Public House and the Sportsbar.  This week she spoke to Daily News on Sunday Lifestyle about her love for helping dancers, especially female through training and offering business grants which saw her launch the Londoners Entertainment Fund Trust (LEFT). During this coronavirus lockdown, LEFT has helped several dance groups with food hampers and some cash injections into their businesses. Q: Which are some of the female dancers that you have worked with?
A: Girls La Musica, Mambokadzi, Exotica, Brenda Eveleigh aka Anastasia the pioneer of pole dancing now based in the UK. Both Zoey and Bev worked with and learned from her, and many more. Q: What inspires you to make these interventions for the female dancers?
A: I come from a background of poverty. I know what it is to be poor. I grew up on Social Welfare and help from the Roman Catholic Church. I am a very spiritual woman. I have been blessed more than even I can understand at times. I don’t mean materially. Surely the blessings are not mine alone….by nature I enjoy helping people in whatever way I can. ‘To whom much is given, much is required.’ Q: How did you find yourself in showbiz?
A: I was a model in my younger years with Zollies, Mahogany Cover Girl, Edgar’s face for almost two years doing almost all of their advertisements and a lot of ramp at the then Sheraton Hotel. I loved dancing from way back when. I have always had a great interest in entertainment.   Q: You have worked with female dancers; what is it that you think should be improved in their sector? Is it organised?
A: In this sector, female dancers form the greatest number and time after time there are many reports of them being prejudiced and taken advantage of by many promoters and establishments.
From sexual harassment, sexual abuse and blatant robbery as some refuse to pay for their services. There is greater need for building awareness on their rights and also a collective platform to name and shame those rogue promoters.
A lot has to be done still in terms of taking care of the needs of artists and more-so the needs of the female dancers, starting from having more women representatives within the association. There is also an organisation that they are free to join; Dancers Association of Zimbabwe that represents their interests and welfare. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Q: Given enough support and resources, what other projects would you like to initiate?
A: One of the greater needs for many of the dancers I have worked with is the desire for many of them to complete their studies, from basic education such as ‘‘O’’ Levels to even professional courses and certifications.
So establishing an academy of some sort that would work as a conduit to help those that would want to pursue their academic studies would definitely be something that I think would be in line with my desire to equip and empower these young people to become productive and reach their full potential. I am aware that it will not be an easy journey but I believe that it can be done and we can make a difference. Q: The ultimate goal of your Trust, what it is?
A: The ultimate goal of the Trust is to develop a pool of artists who run their trades professionally, mindful of a future where they are self-sustaining through establishing productive and profitable businesses. We will achieve this through training and building their capacity to innovate and form viable business enterprises.
As a trust we will offer financial support as well as render business strategy, monitoring and evaluation support to ensure that their projects stand a chance to succeed.    Q: The current lockdown, has it taught you something?
A: Like everybody else around the world, it most certainly has. On one hand it has highlighted just how bad business can get, faced with very low to no sales. Then there is the welfare of staff that depends on the business for survival and on the other hand it has presented opportunities to innovate just to stay afloat.
All in all it has forged a closer understanding between staff and management on how it is a collective responsibility to pay attention to the bottom line. United we stand! Q: In your spare time what do you like doing?
A: Travelling, reading, walking and listening to Master Class Movies Poetry, I am greatly inspired by the late Dr Maya Angelou. Q: What is your association with Londoners Night Club?
A: I own the business alongside my husband. Q: How big is your family; kids; marriage?
A: I have three children; Farai is my first born daughter, a graduate in animal husbandry, Zandile is my second born daughter a chef and Cornelius is my only son.