Tinashe Sibanda
Lifestyle Writer
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw UNITED States-based journalist and singer Pezzy Sichula Kudakwashe aka Pastor Pezzy has dropped his first official song titled Heal Our Land which marks the direction in which his music will take. Kudakwashe, who has always been into music, had not officially released his songs until now when he has decided to drop the official video of Heal our Land on YouTube. In an interview with the Daily News, Kudakwashe said: “My latest musical offering points to my direction; I want to fully participate in choosing, selecting and writing my own music.” He said in the past if he wrote a song, he would let the producer determine the final production. Kudakwashe said the decision to release this track was inspired by his eldest daughter Natasha, who advised him that he needed to make his music more current. “That really inspired me because, I decided that unless my music is appreciated by the people I play with, it can never speak to any of them.” Heal our Land is a highly inspirational song that encourages people to seek the Lord when it comes to national healing and making the world a better place for everyone. Kudakwashe said he feels that his music is indeed timely as the response has been overwhelming. He said he was pleased he has not received any negative feedback since sending it out on various online platforms. “The only negative or maybe positive review I am getting is that people do not actually believe it is me. They say it is too good,” said Kudakwashe. His music is available on various online platforms such as iTunes, Amazon and Google Play.
Kudakwashe said he is already back in the studio with Mr Hoffie Jay, formally of Zimpraise and now a Dallas, Texas-based producer, working on some new tunes. Kudakwashe trained as a journalist at the Christian College of Southern Africa (Ccosa) and graduated in the 1990 radio/television and broadcasting plus print media class before moving to Zambia in 1991 to work with the Zambia National broadcasting Corporation and World Vision International (Zambia office) respectively. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He then moved to the United States in 2001 and pursued studies in electronic media at Southern Maine Community College.