Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zw FORMER Miss Deaf Photogenic Africa winner Kuda Mapeture has designed a unique face mask for the deaf community. This comes after government last month made it mandatory for everyone to put on a face mask as the country strives to curb the spread of the deadly coronavirus (Covid-19). The deaf community, however, faced challenges with available face masks as they were not friendly in communicating since facial expression including the smile and lip movement among others are part of the deaf language. The newly designed mask is made up of transparent (clear) material which covers the mouth while fabric surrounds the nose. Miss Deaf Pride Zimbabwe said Mapeture wants all the deaf and hearing-impaired not to feel out of place but rather understand each other in a more easy way for it is part of the deaf culture. “Sign language is one of the main languages in Zimbabwe hence it is very necessary. For her, facial expression including smile and lip reading are part of their language hence she saw it fit to design a mask that shows their smiles and expressions when smiling. She wants to inspire the deaf communities that in spite of all this, they are not alone and can still smile.” For the face mask production, Mapeture has partnered Shanduko Garments. “She is working with Shanduko Garments in the production of the masks. Thank you Shanduko Garments and the directors so much for the unwavering support you have shown to the deaf community, and the encouragement to keep strong in these Covid-19 difficult times,” said Miss Deaf Pride Zimbabwe. In March, the government announced a national lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19 before making it compulsory for citizens to put on face mask –anything even doeks that protect the mouth and nose from possible exposure to the virus that has killed over 400 000 people worldwide since it was first detected in Wuhan city in China in December. Zimbabwe has recorded four Covid-19-related deaths so far.