POPULAR pole dancer Zoey Sifelani has received funding from the Londoners Entertainment Fund Trust (Left) to boost her business as the organisation helps artists who have been grounded by the coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown. Zoey and DJ Torne received $8 125 from LEFT, which they are using to buy and sell chickens and fish.
“We are super delighted with this timely rescue package from LEFT and we promise to use the funds wisely,” said Zoey. Debbie Mubi, a board member of LEFT, said the initiative is meant to assist both dancers and DJs under a formal Trust which is currently being registered as a legal entity. “A second group is lined up to receive financing once it has gone through the basic training and project planning basics,” said Mubi, adding that she was grateful for donations from Daniel Mckenzie and Dennis Ziki. “Our mission is to equip and empower as many groups possible in becoming self-sustainable. “We will be offering the beneficiaries not only funding but also requisite business skills to enable them to grow and blossom.” Apart from Mubi, other trustees on the board of LEFT include chairperson Farai James, who has been involved behind the scenes in the entertainment industry. He has worked with various artists, rendering management and business strategy. “As a seasoned IT specialist and entrepreneur with a passion for the development of young people, he will be guiding the artists to realise their full potential. “Over the years Farai has been conducting business training for small business owners/entrepreneurs and marginalised groups. The board will benefit immensely from his wealth of experience in business training and development,” said Mubi. Another board member is Pindurai Mwakurudza, a multi-talented businesswoman. “Pindurai has featured in a number of ZTV dramas which include Conflicts, Ezakomatselela and Makorokoza. She is currently featuring in Estate Blues. “A former dancer herself, her insights and experience will prove very valuable to the board. Other members are Noleen Sirani, a professional dancer with various business interests who is the board’s artist liaison while Cornelius Peter Mubi, currently doing his masters in Finance and Economics, completes the board.”