Tarisai Machakaire STAFF WRITER machakairet@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWE Cricket (ZC) could now find themselves without a home venue in the capital after Harare Sports Club (HSC) applied for an eviction order against the organisation following a dispute over non-payment of rentals since 2017. The application seeks to have the lease agreement entered into by both parties in 1999 cancelled. “The first respondent and all persons claiming occupation through it be and are hereby ordered to vacate the property commonly known as the Harare Sports Club within three days of granting of this order,” reads the sought order. In the event that ZC fails to vacate the premises, HSC has applied that the Sheriff of the High Court be empowered to enforce the eviction. If this relief is granted, it will be a big blow for ZC since they host most of their international games and practice sessions at HSC. ZC’s headquarters and offices are also housed at the venue. In an affidavit deposed by the venue’s president, David Young, the court heard that on July 16, 1999 HSC and ZC entered into a notarial agreement of lease for 24 years and 11 months up to March 31, 2024. In the agreement, ZC was supposed to pay monthly rentals of $40 000 in advance, which would be escalated on an annual basis at rates agreed by the parties. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); In the event of failure to agree on a rate, the rental payable would be determined and set by an independent arbitrator appointed by mutual agreement by both parties. ZC is currently liable for US$7 500 in rentals arrears since July 2017. This prompted HSC to issue a termination of the lease and demanded rental arrears in a letter dated May 19 this year. ZC responded by challenging the lawfulness of the termination and claimed that the payments had since been made in full. Despite ZC finally settling the rental arrears, HSC are insisting that the lease should be cancelled since there was a breach of contract.