VETERAN filmmaker and actress Marian Kunonga is starring in a new movie expected to hit the screen anytime this year. The movie is called Shaina and it revolves around hope, determination and resilience. “This film gives you drama and brings you suspense. Shaina tells the story of a group of Zimbabwean friends facing life-threatening obstacles. As they fight to overcome their circumstances, they discover that by believing in themselves they can achieve their dreams,” reads part of the synopsis of the movie. The forthcoming movie was sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Zimbabwe. Kunonga who played the leading role in the first local feature film Flame which highlights the plight of women during the liberation struggle, has been on a sabbatical from the arts and concentrating on her family. Kunonga is a holder of a Bachelors’ Degree in Motion Picture Medium. She majored on editing, cinematography and directing from AFDA Film School in South Africa. She is not only a force to reckon with in the country but the entire region at large. She is behind the popular short films such as Zvinhu Zvacho and Tiraburu among others. Her footprints are not only found in the country but also in countries such as South Africa, Mozambique, Zambia and Malawi among others. In 2005, she produced and directed Mozambique’s ministry of Information and Publicity Solidarity Bash held in Avibeira Stadium in Chimoio. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); She has produced and directed local state functions in the form of Mzee Bira held in Masvingo (2005) and 21st February Movement Gala (2011). In 2006, Kunonga moved to Malawi where she produced award-winning documentaries that centred on rural development and self-sustenance and these include I Am All Woman a documentary following a victim of domestic violence and Anambewe, a documentary on the plight of Malawian women celebrating the work of Norwegian playwright, theatre director, and poet Ibsen Hendrik, among others. 