THE Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) yesterday finally heeded the call to help financially-troubled Castle Lager Premiership teams and cushion them from the effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.Zifa has lately been under fire for insisting the financial aid they received from both Fifa and Caf will only go towards the association’s administration costs.The association got US$700 000 from Fifa and a further US$200 000 from Caf which should all be used as a stimulus to help football activities during the pandemic.Most football associations on the continent have quickly moved to distribute these funds to clubs, players, coaches and referees.
Speaking following a board meeting in the capital yesterday, Zifa president Felton Kamambo said they had decided to bail out local clubs.“PSL said they are facing challenges in as far as the running of clubs are concerned and the board provisionally agreed to assist. We will come back to them on June 20, the secretariat will work on a paper on how we are going to assist them,” Kamambo said after the meeting.“PSL boss (Farai Jere) gave a detailed account of how our teams are struggling and the board made a decision to assist.”
Most local clubs have no solid financial blueprint as they largely depend on gate-takings for survival; a flawed strategy which can hardly sustain teams especially in an economy like ours.Zimbabwe has been in lockdown since March 30 as health officials are trying to contain the spread of the virus.
The 2020 season should have commenced in March but it had to be suspended until further notice due to the spread of the coronavirus.The government has announced that the lockdown will continue for an indefinite period and remaining afloat for most clubs during such uncertain times is now a big challenge.Kamambo said his board also discussed issues related to how they intend to start the 2020 season.
“We also discussed the resumption of our football. The competitions committee and other stakeholders, the PSL, Division One and others will have a meeting this week to discuss modalities of resumption which we will then submit to the SRC for approval,” he said. In countries where football has resumed, they are following strict health guidelines which include testing all players and staff before and after matches.Fans are also not allowed to attend the games, with the teams playing before empty stadia.
Due to the high costs of the testing kits, most locals teams will not be able to follow these guidelines.With clubs relying on gate-takings for survival, empty stadia will bring financial ruin to local football.These are all the issues that must be ironed out before local football can resume.
However, with Zifa now agreeing to bail out the PSL, some of the financial burden on clubs can now be lessened.Meanwhile, yesterday’s board meeting was used as an opportunity to introduce the Zifa constitutional review committee.“We had our meeting and it discussed quite a number of issues, one of them being the installation of a constitutional review committee, which is made up of nine members. So, we were introducing them to the board,” Kamambo said.“It therefore means they are able to start work as the constitutional review committee.
We have given them up to end of August to come up with a draft constitution so that when we have our AGM in September the draft constitution will then be discussed by the assembly and possibly adopted.“It’s quite an enormous task because they have to align our constitution with requirements from Fifa and after that they will then take recommendations from the assembly and our affiliates.”“As you know because of the Covid-19 we couldn’t meet as a board regularly but the emergency committee has been meeting and some of the decisions they made needed the board’s approval. “I’m glad that the board approved all the emergency committee decisions which were made during the (said) period and among them was the appeal of vice-president (Gift Banda) which was discussed in the meeting.”
Kamambo also spoke on servicing the association’s legacy debt. “On the legacy debt, I’m sure you are aware that we are paying our creditors. We made a decision as the emergency committee to say whoever had an agreement with us, we are then going to pay and that’s what we are doing.
“We have paid more than $7,5 million, and from where we are coming from it’s quite a long way.
“We are left with just a few, we have given ourselves a target and our deadline was yesterday (Friday) to submit the paper to Fifa so we are going to do it this week.“You are aware that it’s more of a project than anything else and the board made a decision to pay now then get a refund from Fifa.
Kamambo continued: “Life has never been this good at Zifa, we are enjoying our life and I’m sure football will do the talking.“We want to change the image of Zifa so that everyone will want to be associated with Zifa. Even the previous presidents who failed to pay themselves, we have actually paid them now.  Zifa has lately been under fire for insisting the financial aid they received from both Fifa and Caf will only go towards the association’s administration costs.  The association got US$700 000 from Fifa and a further US$200 000 from Caf which should all be used as a stimulus to help football activities during the pandemic.  Most football associations on the continent have quickly moved to distribute these funds to clubs, players, coaches and referees.
Speaking following a board meeting in the capital yesterday, Zifa president Felton Kamambo said they had decided to bail out local clubs.  “PSL said they are facing challenges in as far as the running of clubs are concerned and the board provisionally agreed to assist. We will come back to them on June 20, the secretariat will work on a paper on how we are going to assist them,” Kamambo said after the meeting.  “PSL boss (Farai Jere) gave a detailed account of how our teams are struggling and the board made a decision to assist.”
Most local clubs have no solid financial blueprint as they largely depend on gate-takings for survival; a flawed strategy which can hardly sustain teams especially in an economy like ours.  Zimbabwe has been in lockdown since March 30 as health officials are trying to contain the spread of the virus.
The 2020 season should have commenced in March but it had to be suspended until further notice due to the spread of the coronavirus.  The government has announced that the lockdown will continue for an indefinite period and remaining afloat for most clubs during such uncertain times is now a big challenge.  Kamambo said his board also discussed issues related to how they intend to start the 2020 season.
“We also discussed the resumption of our football. The competitions committee and other stakeholders, the PSL, Division One and others will have a meeting this week to discuss modalities of resumption which we will then submit to the SRC for approval,” he said. In countries where football has resumed, they are following strict health guidelines which include testing all players and staff before and after matches.  Fans are also not allowed to attend the games, with the teams playing before empty stadia.
Due to the high costs of the testing kits, most locals teams will not be able to follow these guidelines.  With clubs relying on gate-takings for survival, empty stadia will bring financial ruin to local football.  These are all the issues that must be ironed out before local football can resume.
However, with Zifa now agreeing to bail out the PSL, some of the financial burden on clubs can now be lessened.  Meanwhile, yesterday’s board meeting was used as an opportunity to introduce the Zifa constitutional review committee.  “We had our meeting and it discussed quite a number of issues, one of them being the installation of a constitutional review committee, which is made up of nine members. So, we were introducing them to the board,” Kamambo said.  “It therefore means they are able to start work as the constitutional review committee.
We have given them up to end of August to come up with a draft constitution so that when we have our AGM in September the draft constitution will then be discussed by the assembly and possibly adopted.  “It’s quite an enormous task because they have to align our constitution with requirements from Fifa and after that they will then take recommendations from the assembly and our affiliates.”  “As you know because of the Covid-19 we couldn’t meet as a board regularly but the emergency committee has been meeting and some of the decisions they made needed the board’s approval. “I’m glad that the board approved all the emergency committee decisions which were made during the (said) period and among them was the appeal of vice-president (Gift Banda) which was discussed in the meeting.”
Kamambo also spoke on servicing the association’s legacy debt. “On the legacy debt, I’m sure you are aware that we are paying our creditors. We made a decision as the emergency committee to say whoever had an agreement with us, we are then going to pay and that’s what we are doing.
“We have paid more than $7,5 million, and from where we are coming from it’s quite a long way.
“We are left with just a few, we have given ourselves a target and our deadline was yesterday (Friday) to submit the paper to Fifa so we are going to do it this week.  “You are aware that it’s more of a project than anything else and the board made a decision to pay now then get a refund from Fifa.
Kamambo continued: “Life has never been this good at Zifa, we are enjoying our life and I’m sure football will do the talking.  “We want to change the image of Zifa so that everyone will want to be associated with Zifa. Even the previous presidents who failed to pay themselves, we have actually paid them now. 