Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw©️  PRIMARY and Secondary Education minister Cain Mathema has said the government is set to meet the health and safety guidelines required in order for the June examinations to take place starting next week, the Daily News reports.  This comes as the High Court recently ruled that health and safety measures against the Covid-19 infections must be in place at all June examination centres by June 26 in line with the prescribed standards of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in order for the exams to take place from June 30 to July 23, 2020.  Speaking during a post-Cabinet media briefing held in Harare on Tuesday, Mathema indicated that Treasury had released $315 million to capacitate his ministry in implementing the High Court’s ruling.  “We are very capacitated to handle examinations. Yesterday, we received 10 000 litres of sanitisers from our universities. These will be distributed to the examination centres across the country. The ministry of Finance through the Treasury has released $315 million to assist us run the exams that are coming next week, so we are very much capacitated.  “We also have bowsers that are going to be on standby to provide water because drilling a borehole does not mean that water will be available down there, so we are making sure that bowsers are available. This money will also enable us to purchase thermometers that are required and disinfection facilities,” Mathema said.  He further said that schools had produced all Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) needed for examinations, and that parents would not be required to pay for the procurement of these items. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Mathema added that the government would soon avail routes which will be used by transport to ferry candidates and examiners to school.  “We are working with all government departments to ensure that everything is set on time. We are working with the ministry of Local Government and ministry of Transport and we have plans to provide transport for the pupils who will be sitting for exams. Within the next few days, we will reveal the routes which will be followed because we have all the names of the candidates and exam centres,” he said.  Various organisations have warned the government against rushing to reopen schools before necessary measures are put in place to mitigate the spread of the deadly Covid-19, as neighbouring South Africa is currently shutting down schools owing to teachers and learners testing positive for Covid-19.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw 