©️  EXILED former Local Government minister Saviour Kasukuwere has said he is a firm believer in constitutionalism and cannot stage a coup as he was a victim of the same in November 2017, the Daily News reports. This follows allegations by the government that he peddled lies about an impending coup against President Emmerson Mnangagwa. Home Affairs minister Kazembe Kazembe told a meeting in Harare last week, comprising security chiefs from all key agencies — including the police, army, Air Force, prisons and correctional services and State security — that Kasukuwere, MDC-Alliance deputy national chairperson Job Sikhala and online publications were peddling falsehoods about an impending coup. However, in a statement yesterday, Kasukuwere said the allegations were “laughable”. “… I deny this unfounded allegation against me and dismiss it with the contempt it deserves. “I am a firm believer in constitutionalism and would never attempt or conspire to carry out a coup of any sort. I … am a victim of the November 2017 coup and retain the scars of this horrific event. “Our nation has greater challenges that behove us all to rise beyond narrow interests and place the collective security and survival of our people at the centre of governance,” Kasukuwere said. Kasukuwere — who fled the country during the military operation that ousted the late Robert Mugabe — said the country was currently facing a number of challenges which required unity of purpose. “Threats and efforts to eliminate those viewed as adversaries to the powers-that-be are unfortunate and should have no place in a democratic Zimbabwe. “The nation faces a plethora of difficulties that require a united front in order to secure the collective interests of the people of Zimbabwe. “The challenges are not insurmountable and I am a Zimbabwean who desires to see the best for our nation and her people,” Kasukuwere said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); In his speech last week, Kazembe gave a stern warning to the alleged purveyors of the false information, including Internet-based publications. “Government would like to sternly warn the purveyors of these medley falsehoods — who include such characters as Saviour Kasukuwere, Job Sikhala and a coterie of their accomplices who we are aware of — not to cry foul when the long arm of Zimbabwean law catches up with them in due course,” Kazembe said.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw  