HARARE – The Footballers Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) has secured sanitary pads for Women Soccer League (WSL) players from the Bulawayo region in a bid to cushion them from the effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19). Harare-based businesswoman Sithulisiwe Mthimkhulu, who is also an Assistant Commissioner with the Zimbabwe Republic Police, provided the donation to 12 teams worth $30 000. The teams that will benefit include Barrow Jets, Biya and Friends, New Orleans, Highlanders Royals, Magwegwe, ZRP and Street Set. Players from Mpopoma, Sobhukazi, Ntumbani, Bantu and Hearts of Oak all stand to receive the pads. Fuz vice-president Herbert Dick praised Mthimukulu for coming to the women’s rescue as such a critical time. “This is a noble thing by Mthimkhuli. We hope to see more people chipping in to help the girl child. These kids need our support,” former Warriors defender said. “It’s high time people recognise that girls can pursue soccer as a profession just like their male counterparts.” Fuz committee member Nomsa “Boys” Moyo, called on more corporate support to women’s football. “It’s a blessing for what Mthimkhuli has done for these girls. You find that these days a lot of people focus more on men while forgetting the girl child,” the former Mighty Warriors star said. “I would like to urge more people out there that if you want to donate to men’s football, please also remember the girl child. This gesture by Mthimkuli will obviously go a long way in lifting these girls’ spirits. “We are currently going through some tough times because of the coronavirus and it’s not easy for most people, so this will definitely help one way or the other.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Mthimkhulu said funds permitting; she will extend her donation to the rest of the women’s football teams across the country. “What we are doing is to motivate these girls so that they can pursue football just like their male counterparts,” she said. “We have started here in Bulawayo and the idea is to spread this initiative across the country. Very soon we will also be doing the same to clubs in Harare and other provinces.”