Blessings Mashaya and Mugove Tafirenyika SENIOR STAFF WRITERS  ©️  SECURITY chiefs yesterday dismissed talk of a pending military coup against President Emmerson Mnangagwa and his government — warning that they will descend heavily on all the purveyors of such information, the Daily News reports. In addition, they also warned former senior Zanu PF officials and leading opposition figures that authorities would catch up with them for continuing to make “reckless utterances”. This comes as Mnangagwa himself also blew his gasket yesterday, accusing political foes of trying to make Zimbabwe ungovernable — before also issuing a strong warning that security agents would descend on them heavily. The meeting comprised security chiefs drawn from all key agencies — including the police, army, airforce, prisons and correctional services and State security — who used to converge under the Joint Operations Command (JOC), now referred to as the National Security Council. This comes after the military staged a popular coup which ended the ruinous reign of the late former president Robert Mugabe in November 2017 — as the country’s economic state began to deteriorate precipitously, amid escalating ugly Zanu PF factional and succession wars. It also comes as Zimbabwe is currently experiencing its worst economic crisis in a decade, which has been exacerbated by the deadly effects of the global coronavirus pandemic and the regional drought that has left millions of people in the country facing starvation. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Despite showing early signs of efforts to turn around the economy, which had suffered from years of corruption and mismanagement under Mugabe, Mnangagwa and his lieutenants are now finding the going tough. So deep are the country’s economic problems that the hapless Zim dollar — which was prematurely and ill-advisedly re-introduced by under-fire Finance minister Mthuli Ncube last year — is collapsing spectacularly, which, in turn, has triggered steep price increases of basic consumer goods. Meanwhile, a bristling Mnangagwa earlier in the day warned that he would deal decisively with his detractors “working to make Zimbabwe ungovernable”. Addressing a Zanu PF politburo meeting in Harare yesterday, the angry Mnangagwa said there was an upsurge of “unwarranted onslaught” against his party, the government and its policies. He said this had culminated in the alleged abductions of MDC Alliance youth leaders — MP Joanna Mamombe, Cecilia Chimbiri and Netsai Marova — setting off a resurgence of hate speech and language in the country. “This vile culture must be rejected by all peace-loving people. “These confrontational actions which played out in the political, economic and media arena, were not isolated incidences, but well-orchestrated, co-ordinated and planned events. “I am aware that the intention was to cause despondency, unrest, violence and to render the country ungovernable. These acts should never be tolerated,” Mnangagwa fumed. “I urge the party and the nation as a whole to remain alert. “Let us refuse to be divided by vigilantes who are hired by hostile foreign governments to distract us from our quest to grow our economy and improve the quality of lives for all, in peace, unity and love. “Comrades, rest assured that our security apparatus will get to the bottom of these machinations and those involved will be brought to account,” Mnangagwa warned further. Turning to businesses, the 77-year-old Zanu PF leader said there were “economic saboteurs and unscrupulous businesses that unjustifiably increased prices in pursuit of “a nefarious agenda”. “On the economic front, we are witnessing a relentless attack on our currency and the economy in general through exorbitant pricing models. “We are fully cognisant that this is a battle being fuelled by our political detractors, elite opportunists and malcontents who are bent on pushing a nefarious agenda. They will never win. “We did not liberate this country for selfish profiteers and greedy individuals, but for all the peoples in our land,” Mnangagwa said ominously. To highlight the anxiety that the collapsing economy has created in the upper echelons of power, both Ncube and Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) governor John Mangudya attended yesterday’s politburo meeting, to apprise Zanu PF leaders about the country’s economic state. Both men are not members of Zanu PF’s powerful decision-making organ. Mnangagwa also said yesterday that his government was resisting being tempted to go on a retrogressive path — adding that Zanu PF was a peace-loving organisation that was “on a path to building the country into an economic giant”. “We, therefore, reject the temptation of being drawn into issues that drive our nation backwards. “Let those sinking into political oblivion do so on their own,” he said while having a go at the MDC Alliance’s Nelson Chamisa. Chamisa is currently under the cosh from a rival faction led by Thokozani Khupe which recently seized the party’s iconic Harvest House headquarters from the youthful politician and his lieutenants.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw