Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zw©️   ZIMDANCEHALL chanter Seh Calaz was on Tuesday this week appointed brand ambassador of Stop Tuberculosis (TB) Partnership Zimbabwe.  For his new role, the Mabhanditi leader, as Seh Calaz is affectionately known in the music circles, will spearhead campaigns aimed at alleviating TB infections in the country.  “I am humbled to be appointed as the TB Champion for Zimbabwe by the Stop TB Partnership which involves the Health ministry and other partners.  “To me, the appointment is an honour and it will afford me the opportunity to play my part in raising awareness about TB in our country. I am ready to serve. Bholato Bholato,” Seh Calaz, whose real name is Tawanda Mumanyi, said.  The Stop TB Partnership was formed in response to various interests by partners that collaborate with the Health and Child Care ministry through the national TB programme. The main aim is to maximise efficiency and effectiveness of efforts towards eradicating TB in the country.  The programme was officially launched last year by First Lady Auxilia Mnangagwa who described the initiative as “one of many other level country partnerships under the global Stop TB partnerships and many thanks to the USAid and WHO for the support and being part of this visionary work which led to the birth of Zimbabwe’s Stop TB Partnership.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Meanwhile, with the new role, Seh Calaz is expected to discourage ghetto youths from smoking and taking other harmful drugs that may cause TB.  Seh Calaz is known for hits such as Mumota Murikubvira, Handikendenge, Handipisike and Kwatinobva Kwakasiyana among others. Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw 