INAUGURAL Mr Zimbabwe People’s Choice pageant winner Tatenda Njanike believes the coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown has forced him and others to think outside the box and not only rely on the conventional way of doing things.  Crowned last year, his reign is set to end in December.
Njanike said although the pandemic has disrupted all his 2020 plans, he has no regrets of his reign.  “I constantly pray and remind myelf that God saw it fit for me to be crowned Mr Zimbabwe in such a time as this and there are things I can still do in this season that will matter.”  Together with his team, he has managed to create an online platform to guide models and teach them how to navigate the industry and make an impact in their communities.   Through this online pageant he expects to groom three young boys to be effective community leaders who use their talents to uplift people around them. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “We have already managed to send a donation to a Bulawayo-based old people’s home.”
The model has also been learning how to use digital tools to further his education and has learnt how to design portfolios.  “It is unfortunate that because of the pandemic I have had to reschedule my plan to fundraise stationery for schools but I have managed to engage TelOne Centre for Learning to partner with me on that project and we will be able to continue when it is safe for schools to reopen. But I have been empowered in many ways to build myself as a brand, I have learned to network and partner with influential people and I remain hopeful of the future.”  The model is also an advocate for youth financial inclusion through innovation whose wish is to partner with various institutions in building online hubs for education. He also aims to hold campaigns against gender- based violence so as to foster peace in homes and communities.  During his reign he has managed to partner with local SMEs such as Rehairby to gain youth market share and has been a brand ambassador for Ivhu Tribe.  Born and raised in Harare, Njanike had always dreamt of becoming a model since his teenage years at Westridge High School and the heavens eventually smiled at him when he was crowned the Mr Zimbabwe People’s Choice winner in Harare last year.  While he grew up without a role model in the modelling industry, he always felt a desire to express himself through modelling.  “My mother has been my source of inspiration; she is a prayerful warrior of life who remains agile in the face of adversity and has set a good example for me.” 