Godknows Matarutse SPORTS WRITER matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw SUSPENDED Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) vice president Gift Banda wants his disciplinary hearing which was supposed to have been held today cancelled after questioning the association’s motive. Banda has been fighting against his suspension since last February and has been winning the case at every turn. However, Zifa kept on appealing against the decision and earlier this month the appeals committee threw out the association’s application on a technicality. Zifa had failed to prove they had indeed paid the appeals fees meaning that Banda should have been reinstated. The association through their legal advisor Chenaimoyo Gumiro sought condonation against the decision after claiming they had located the proof of payment. The Zifa Appeals Committee is supposed to sit today to determine whether the association can be granted the relief it was seeking. But Banda’s lawyer Munyaradzi Nzarayapenga now wants the hearing not to go ahead after they were asked to make more submissions before the appeals committee. “The matter has been sat down very prematurely, we were not given enough notice to defend our client,” said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “So, we asked for a postponement of the matter, there are still quite a number of procedural issues that we are unhappy with given that this application itself is alien to the rules of football. “It’s the first time that an appeals committee is being asked to deal with the same matter twice, it’s unprecedented. “The appeals committee has already pronounced itself from this matter and now it is being asked to re-do the same issue. The application that has been filed now is alien to the governing statutes of football in Zimbabwe. “The matter has prematurely sat, we have not been given all the adequate information for us to prepare a response then there hasn’t been any heads of argument filed by anybody and now already there is a satdown, so there are challenges.” Banda’s legal woes surfaced only two months into his reign after he won the election against incumbent Omega Sibanda during the December 2018 pools. The former Njube Sundowns director was suspended after he was accused of making changes to the technical teams for both the Warriors and the Mighty Warriors without the knowledge of other members of the executive committee. In his defence, Banda claimed he announced the changes after they had been agreed following a full board meeting. He also alleges that he is being persecuted after he called for a forensic audit of the Zifa accounts which up till today has not been conducted.