GIFT Banda, pictured, is synonymous in fighting football battles. His ascendency to the Zifa vice-presidency was not without a fight. It was not an easy road for the former Njube Sundowns director as he fought a bitter struggle in order to be nominated and cleared to take part in the Zifa election in December 2018. He was barred by the Zifa Electoral Committee from running against the then incumbent vice-president Omega Sibanda and also had his appeal thrown out before being reinstated following the intervention of Fifa. As if that was not enough, upon receiving an overwhelming seal of approval from the Zifa electorate thumping Sibanda 37-22, Banda found himself in trouble just a month into office. The Bulawayo-based businessman and politician was suspended by Zifa president Felton Kamambo in February 2019 after he was accused of having reshuffled the Warriors technical team without the input of his fellow executive committee members. Since then, Banda has been in the cold for more than a year and had to endure another frustrating fight as his appeal against the suspension was blocked at every turn. Last week, the case against Banda was finally dismissed on a technicality since it could not be established if Zifa had paid the appeal fee as demanded by their rules and regulations. This was because on March 7, Banda had been cleared of any wrongdoing by the football mother body’s disciplinary committee, only for the association to pull a shocker by appealing against a decision passed by their committee. But despite all this and speaking for the first time after his latest victory, Banda insists all that happened is now water under the bridge, saying the fight should be to see football developing. “From day one, I’m a person who believes in constitutionalism and everyone knows that there was quite a lot that was not done by the book,” Banda opened up to the Daily News on Sunday. “But at the same time, I’m not a vengeful person. I will be hoping that people realise where they would have gone wrong because at the end of the day football is supposed to be the winner. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “I’m not in a position at the moment to say much about what transpired other than that I’m just coming in and will work for football to develop and assist in making sure things are done in the right way. “I don’t hold any grudges with anyone because my intention when I ran for this position was to bring in the expertise that I have. Remember football can never be run by a single person, it’s supposed to be team work. “If you are a striker, you are a striker and you cannot play as a defender at the same time, so one needs to understand that football is a team sport, it’s administration should also be about team work. I believe together we can make our football better. “We need also to bring in the necessary stakeholders to come in and impart whatever knowledge they have that can help our game improve.” Banda continued: “For me what’s important is to see football developing and us to be guided by the Zifa constitution. The worst thing is, if such things happen to the vice-president of the association what about a mere chairperson of a province or a board member of a region? “If you look at the unnecessary expenses that have been incurred by both sides it’s not healthy for our football. All we should do if there is a case is to deal with it in the shortest possible period so that it doesn’t cost the association, even those involved.” Apparently, upon being ushered into office, Banda called for the association to conduct a forensic audit, which appeared not to go down well with some members of the executive. At the moment, Zifa is sitting on a legacy debt of over US$7 million which began to accumulate during Cuthbert Dube’s reign. And for Banda, he believes transparency is key if the association is to attract sponsors among other things.
“For any organisation to have goodwill, it needs to show the outside world that it is a transparent organisation,” he said. “I urge my colleagues that perhaps we take a different approach so that we have goodwill from the corporate and outside world so that at any given time people will be willing to participate in Zifa issues. “One thing is that you need to have friends everywhere in order for us to prosper as an organisation. Mine was never a personal witch-hunt. I’ve heard a lot of people saying who is behind this, who is trying to do this, I’ve said if we are a team time is the best teller on whether you are pulling together. “This is actually the reason why I never fought even a single day, I allowed the process to take its course and it’s up to Zifa now and colleagues what their stance will be. Do they want us to continue working for football or they are some that will be generally happy with this bloodbath? “I’m one person who believes in upholding the constitution. And I was prepared to even take my case to Cas (Court of Arbitration for Sport) for it to be heard in a proper way. I felt a lot of things were not done in a proper way.” Banda said he is not in football to make money but to make sure the national game improves.
“I never really feared anything at all. I’m not in football to make money. I’m a businessperson, I spent quite a lot of money in football,” he said. “I think I was one of the youngest individuals to own a football team in the PSL when Njube Sundowns got promoted. “I’ve done it out of the passion that I have for football. This is exactly why I decided to participate in football.”
Meanwhile, Zifa insist that they are going to appeal against the ruling, which exonerated Banda of any wrong doing despite legal experts warning that they will not succeed.