Vasco Chaya CONTROVERSIAL mbira musician Tambaoga, pictured, of the Rambai Makashinga fame is asking for forgiveness from the people of Zimbabwe for supporting Zanu PF “to the extremes” during former president Robert Mugabe’s reign. Tambaoga, real name Last Chiangwa, rose to prominence in 2000s following the release of political jingles such as Agirimende and Rambai Makashinga which got the lion’s share of airplay on all State radio stations and television. However, Tambaoga told the Daily News yesterday that despite the support he got with the blessings of former Information minister Jonathan Moyo, he had had his Damascene moment. “Ndinokumbirawo ruregerero kuruzhinji rweZimbabwe maringe nekunge ndiri munhu akarerekera kubato rezvematongerwo enyika. (People of Zimbabwe, please forgive me for my political allegiance). Honestly I now need your support in my music career,” Tambaoga said. The musician told the Daily News that partisan politics had no place in modern society. “It is my wish to see all the political parties — Zanu PF, MDC among others — in the country coming together for nation building. With the current situation, we are going nowhere as a country. “As a spirit medium, I will work towards achieving this goal just like Bob Marley did when he united warring parties through music,” the 48-year old musician said. Tambaoga said partisan politics only benefits a few at the expense of the majority. “I know the majority of Zimbabweans believe that I have made a lot of money from my music but the truth is that I got less that $200 from that project,” he said. However, Tambaoga said society should bear with him since musicians are just messengers. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The way I am surviving is not tallying with my popularity. I am struggling. Yes, I pushed a certain agenda but that was then. I want people to support my music career and together we can build a better country. We can’t dwell in the past but we have to move on.”