Godknows Matarutse SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw

©️  ZIMBABWEAN players, who ply their trade in South Africa, are excited with the imminent return of the Absa Premiership after the coronavirus (Covid-19)-induced break.  The South African government this week gave the Super Diski the green light to complete their 2019/20 season.
The Absa Premiership has been suspended since March after the government imposed a nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of the coronavirus.  Clubs, which have been training for the past two weeks, are now awaiting the actual date on when the league will officially resume following confirmation by the government that the Super Diski’s proposal for the resumption of training and competitive play have been approved.  Warriors and AmaZulu winger Talent Chawapihwa says he is ready to help his club battle for survival.
Usuthu currently sit second from the bottom and are in desperate need of maximum points to boost their survival chances.  “It’s good to be back again on the field after a long layoff. I’m told the league will be resuming soon and I can’t wait to start,” Chawapihwa told the Daily News.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Of course our position on the log table is not favourable but we need to start fighting for points in the remaining matches. It’s not going to be easy but nothing is impossible, we just need to be positive.”  Warriors goalkeeper Elvis Chipezeze, who is on the books of Baroka FC, is also looking forward to helping his side secure their Super Diski status.  Baroka are also in the relegation mix as they have 23 points.
“It’s back to serious business now, looking forward to some exciting times ahead,” Chipezeze said.
“We started training recently but it has not been intense as we are observing social distancing regulations. Hopefully, things will improve soon.”  The coronavirus lockdown is on Level 3 in South Africa but football had remained suspended across the board. Golden Arrows forward Knox Mutizwa will also be desperate to continue with his scoring touch when the season returns.  The ex-Highlanders star was in top form before corona halted the campaign as he was sitting second on the top goalscorers’ charts.    Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy. This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw 