Tendai Kamhungira
and Blessings Mashaya
STAFF WRITERS THE European Union (EU) has once again expressed disappointment with the government over failure to implement comprehensive political and economic reforms, the Daily News reports. This comes as Harare’s commitment to respecting human rights in the country has once again come under the spotlight, following growing accusations of repression against critics. It also comes after three MDC youth leaders alleged last month that they had been abducted and tortured by suspected State agents, before being dumped near Bindura — in the aftermath of their demonstration in the capital. The trio was re-arrested this week over allegations that their abduction claims were false. Speaking during an online Sapes Trust discussion on Thursday, EU ambassador to Zimbabwe Timo Olkonnen said President Emmerson Mnangagwa had squandered the “hope and goodwill” that he enjoyed when he came to power via a popular military coup in November 2017. “When I came to Zimbabwe, I really expected my job description to be different, right after the 2018 elections.
“There was a lot of hope, goodwill and expectations that the country would take off in a different kind of trajectory … but unfortunately the situation has developed in a different direction,” he said. “Issues like political … and human rights have been much more dominant for obvious reasons because of the developments in the country. “When we are talking about engagement, re-engagement, and for that to happen, you are talking about several issues. But they are all connected. “You are talking about deeper engagement and internationally you can’t separate the economic from the political.
“Obviously, we discuss issues that we have on the human rights and political agenda … and you can’t separate those from the economic engagement,” Olkonnen said further. He also said the EU had been vocal about what they wanted to see happening in Zimbabwe before the re-engagement process is put in motion. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “We have been quite clear and vocal about our expectations, about what should happen. These matters need to be tackled,” he added. Speaking at the same event, Switzerland ambassador to Zimbabwe, Niculin Jaeger, said the country needed a nation building consensus to move forward. He said while the country was battling to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic, the past two months had also witnessed rising political tensions. “I think the moment has come that we have to ask ourselves, should we now allow this coronavirus and this situation to settle scores and fall back to our well-known ideological positions as we usually do when we are under pressure? “Or should we seek the opportunity to move forward and look for new approaches, while acting with restraint?
“And I believe that, first and foremost, we all have common interest and this is to see a democratic consolidation process founded on an inclusive political dialogue that can bring genuine stability and peaceful co-existence,” Jaeger said. Meanwhile, Foreign Affairs deputy minister David Musabayana said the government would continue to push for re-engagement with the international community. “In terms of re-engagement, it’s a process … Democracy and human rights have no measure, and it’s just a perception of some people to say Zimbabwe is not respecting human rights. “That’s why I say we continue to re-engage the West to remove that perception,” Musabayana told the Daily News yesterday. “We are now more motivated to engage them. Our relations are improving. Before the outbreak of Covid-19, our minister (Foreign Affairs minister Sibusiso Moyo) had lined up meetings with the United States, but the plans were affected by Covid-19. “I think we are on the right path in terms of re-engagement,” he added.