Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw ©️  THE Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) is scoring an own goal by going against their own Appeals Committee regarding the case of vice president Gift Banda, who was recently cleared of any wrongdoing. Banda was suspended in February 2018 by Zifa president Felton Kamambo for announcing changes to the Warriors and Mighty Warriors technical teams without the knowledge of his fellow executive committee members. Since then, the Bulawayo-based businessman and politician has been fighting against his suspension and was eventually cleared by the Zifa Disciplinary Committee. The association then approached the Zifa Appeals Committee seeking to overturn the decision to overthrow Banda’s suspension. The case was finally dismissed on a technicality by the Zifa Appeals Committee last week since it could not be established if the association had paid the appeal fee as demanded by their rules and regulations. At the weekend, Zifa legal advisor Chenaimoyo Gumiro said they had finally located the receipt confirming their payment and Banda should remain suspended since they were now seeking condonation from the Appeals Committee. Zifa Appeals Committee chairperson Steady Kachera said they have already received the application from the association. “I have received the application for condonation. They are seeking indulgency so that the case could be re-heard,” Kachere told the Daily News. Banda’s lawyer Munyaradzi Nzarayapenga said they are perplexed by Zifa’s actions in going against their own Appeals Committee. “What we are witnessing is an unprecedented persecution and deliberate alienation of an elected official from matters of football,” Nzarayapenga told the Daily News. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The nation will know the reasons one day since nothing can stay hidden forever. At this point it is highly debatable that Zifa as an organisation is behind these machinations rather it is a few elements who have decided to persist with the legally untenable and systemic blockade of our client from executing his lawful duties. “All aspects of the matter are baffling, the charges were spurious, Zifa proposed we go on agreed facts, their purported appeal against their own decision, their failure to observe the rules leading to the dismissal of the appeal and now the very strange application for condonation that is not provided for in all the rules fortifies our client’s belief of persecution. “We are curious as to which body will hear this purported application as the Appeals Committee has pronounced itself on the matter. To buttress our client’s strong belief that this is not Zifa but a few elements who are on frolic of their own to destabilise legitimate football administration, one just needs to look at the current application. “It’s launched by…Joseph Mamutse (Zifa Ceo) purportedly authorised by Zifa board. The resolution he attaches, however, is dated July 11, 2017 signed by…(Philip) Chiyangwa relating to the Sheriff Zimbabwe. All Zimbabweans know that board’s tenure came to an end and that a new board led by…Kamambo came into place. Why go beyond the current board to launch this purported application?” Another legal expert told the Daily News that Zifa is fighting a lost cause in their application for a condonation against last week’s ruling. “There is an appeal ruling which says that the appeal by Zifa is not in existence. So, basically if there is an appeal ruling by the Appeals Committee you cannot go back to the same Appeals Committee with any form of application unless if you go to any other judicial body,” said the legal expert. “It’s funny you hear a qualified lawyer talking of condonation after a ruling by the Appeals Committee. You only talk of condonation of late filing of an appeal which clearly knew that there was no appeal filed because they didn’t pay. “You can’t attend an appeal hearing well knowing that there is no appeal and after the ruling or hours or days after the ruling you tell the nation that you are going to apply for condonation. “To be cordoned for what really? Again, they can’t apply for the Appeals Committee’s ruling to be rescinded yet they were present during the hearing. “It can’t be and a trained lawyer knows how impossible it is for the same Appeals Committee to listen to you again and overturn its ruling. “The next step is for the aggrieved party to pick up the written Appeals Committee’s judgment and place it to the higher body to determine whatever they what to be determined. The Appeals Committee is now totally out of picture as far as this Banda’s matter is concerned.” In this case Zifa should approach the Court of Arbitration for Sports (Cas) in Lausanne in Switzerland since the Appeals Committee is the highest football judicial body in the country.    Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email:  letters@dailynews.co.zw