Jeffrey Muvundusi 
in Bulawayo THE Heath Streak Cricket Academy Trust is grateful to the support they continually receive from their main sponsor Old Mutual and other associate partners during this coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, the Daily News can report. The coronavirus has had a huge negative effect on the global economy and sport has suffered dearly due to lockdowns that have been imposed worldwide. However, the Heath Streak Cricket Academy has been able to remain afloat due to their good relationship with sponsors and partners alike according to chief executive Joseph Rego. “The Old Mutual Heath Streak Cricket Academy is a 100 percent non-profit making trust which has on board reputable trustees like businessman Industry and Commerce deputy minister Raj Modi, Elifasi Mashaba, former Sports minister David Coltart, former Matabeleland cricketer Dennis Streak who devote their valuable time serving the academy in their capacity without earning a single cent,” Rego told the Daily News. “Academy founder and president…Streak and myself dedicate our lives tirelessly serving the Academy’s children with humility and passion on a voluntary basis without earning any income.” The respected cricket administrator said they use all the proceeds from sponsors and partners to ensure the institution and staff is well catered for. “The academy earnings are ploughed back into the institution towards its development and growth agenda. Between January 2019 and March 2020 the sponsorship of $60 000 generated by the Academy had to be distributed over a period of 15 months towards their (staff) upkeep and survival. “The Academy pays administrative and ground’s staff salaries, Nssa and other levies, their medical aid hospital and clinic plan fees, high electricity cost, monthly water and council charges, rental, has installed the second borehole to maintain their luscious green fields, repairs and upgrading machinery throughout the year. “The upkeep of tractors and equipment, borehole taxes, chemicals, manure and fertiliser, skyrocketing diesel and petrol cost, additional labour and support staff during tournaments and bears a large list of expenses which are never-ending.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Rego said the academy has realised the importance of these good relationships with sponsors and partners after their head groundsman Blessing Mutumwapavi was diagnosed with motor neurone disease a year ago. Through the help of the partners, the academy has been able to secure appointments for Mutumwapavi with specialist doctors. “On humanitarian grounds the academy has been paying Blessing a salary, free accommodation, at times ambulance and medical expenses, towards his electricity, water and council and his monthly medical aid fees for a year even though he has been unable to serve the academy due to his illness. “The academy has also paid Blessing’s shortfall for his medication, his blood test fees and…Modi…has generously contributed towards a scan and other hospital bills,” Rego said.