 Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw CONDOLENCE messages continue to pour in following the sudden death of celebrated former ZPC Kariba and Lancashire Steel assistant coach Oliver “Bla Olaya” Mataba, who passed on after a short illness on Tuesday. Mataba was head coach at lower league side Kariba Waves and is survived by his wife and two kids.
Many people expressed sadness saying he has left a huge hole that will be difficult to fill. Family spokesperson Godfrey Mhoshiwa said: “His burial is provisionally set for tomorrow (today). We are currently working on the modalities to ferry him from Kariba to Kwekwe. He was now based in Kariba where he was working at the time of his death.” Dynamos defender Sylvester Appiah, who played for ZPC between 2015 and 2019, was devastated by Mataba’s death. “He is the one who gave me the opportunity to prove myself in this country. I was injured when I arrived in Kariba and when he got to coach the team after Chaminuka left, he called me up into the team,” the Ghanaian defender told the Daily News yesterday. “We went to Bulawayo to play How Mine and that was my first game for ZPC and I will forever be grateful for everything he did for me. “He used to call me son and he was like a father to me. I’m actually travelling to Kariba right now so I can pay my last respects.” The Footballers Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) also paid tribute to Mataba. “We are extremely pained to hear about the passing of…Mataba. In the hour of grief, we extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and friends. We will always remember you,” Fuz said in a statement. The Zifa Northern Region Division One said: “We are deeply saddened by the untimely passing on of coach Olaya. In this time of bereavement, we can only encourage those he left behind to seek solace from the Almighty. It is also important to celebrate what Mataba did to improve the game in the country. May his dear soul rest in eternal peace.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Mataba’s close friend and Black Rhinos supporter Luckson Muradzikwa was equally shocked by his death. “We had become brothers, I’m saddened, may his soul rest in peace. He was a good person with a huge heart,” he said. Sadly for local football, his death comes just a week after the passing on of another promising coach, Prince Kadewere, brother to Zimbabwe international Tino. Mataba was Jostein Mathuthu’s assistant when ZPC Kariba won promotion into the top flight after winning the 2013 Zifa Northern region Division One League. He was also part of the backroom staff under Saul Chaminuka when the side almost made history by winning the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League title in their first campaign in the top flight. He will be buried today in his hometown of Kwekwe.