Jeffery Muvundusi & Maxwell Sibanda   THE recent surge in coronavirus (Covid-19) cases will prolong the lockdown further and performing artists have written off the year 2020.  Since March, government has put in place stringent measures that ban live concerts and gatherings, grounding all performing artists who are looking elsewhere for survival.  Live shows and planned tours have also been put on indefinite hold.
Iyasa founder Nkululeko Dube said Covid-19 is a game changer that will be with us for a long time.   “Already artists are feeling the pinch and some are really in need of assistance or we may never see them again.”
Dube noted that it was evident the world is going digital hence online is the new stage. “Unfortunately Zimbabwe is lagging behind in terms of technology and resources, hence it will take time for local artists to monetise the online platform and make a living out of it.”   Choreographer Clayton Ndlovu said the prolonged lockdown has dramatically changed the way performing artists have been doing things in the past.  “There is a new normal and everyone should exercise extreme caution if we are to win this war against the coronavirus.  “Obviously, one can be selfish and think that government should open various spaces so that the creative industry can then have performances so that they can put food on the table.  “But at the moment this is not possible due to protocols that have been put in place to help mitigate the spread of Covid-19.
“Safety first and that is important regardless of the numerous challenges especially when it comes to money.
“Various people have been engaging musicians to perform live online and paying them.   “Many overseas production companies have shut down operations and no longer exist. While giving relief funds is a noble idea and is commendable, how sustainable is it? The creative industry needs to be creative to overcome these challenges.”  Poet Albert Nyathi said artists will have to endure a little more. “Opening night clubs and other entertainment spaces at a time cases of Covid-19 are rising would be disastrous. It’s better to preserve lives than make money and lose lives in the process.”  Award-winning poet and presenter Sthandazile Dube said the situation was a disaster for artists and this year has proved to be difficult in terms of live performances.  “It simply means no food on the table as it is the sole source of livelihood for most of us. The way forward is that we need to embrace technology and do more online shows and find new ways and strategies of selling our products.”  Singer Victor Kunonga said: “Unfortunately there is nothing much we can do. We just have to take the situation and imbibe it as it comes. We are still waiting for the support that was promised and if indeed the support is underway, I may not be aware.”
Internationally-acclaimed award winning author and poet Philani Amadeus Nyoni said artists have already lost potential income.   “Keeping that in mind, I try not to take it personally and challenge myself to be more creative with my talents. I am fortunate to be an all-round artist who doesn’t depend only on performances. Covid-19 has been a great blessing; I can’t remember the last time I was required by law to stay indoors and we had uninterrupted electricity. I did some digging and finally completed some of my scripts.”  Playwright and director Thabani Hillary Moyo said Covid-19 has brought with it serious challenges to performing arts and that this year is a complete waste.   “It can work with theatre as well. These can then be sold at affordable prices. Most artists are now uploading their works on Facebook but there are no returns in doing that. You will notice that works that are uploaded online in most cases are funded projects. It doesn’t work with commercial works.”  Drummer Lewis Ndlovu said: “While most artists are now in dire straits due to Covid-19, we just have to be patient until this pandemic passes.”  Reggae star Emmanuel ‘‘Mannex’’ Motsi said the lockdown has given him the chance to concentrate on his community project dubbed Wapakuda (Warren Park Arts & Kulture Development Association). “Through this I have managed to start a community campaign to renovate our sports facilities which have been neglected for a long time.  “So far, I have created a committee and we are renovating basketball and tennis courts. We collected our first donations of cement, sand and quarry from a fellow local businessman who used to play tennis and basketball.  “Ex-classmates and friends who are in the diaspora and others working locally have been in touch and have created a WhatsApp group where members pledge and contribute what they can towards rebuilding the beloved basketball and tennis courts.  “I have also survived through doing jingles and adverts for companies marketing their products.
“Sometimes I get hired to perform at birthday parties and weddings for a small fee with just my acoustic guitar.  “Social media platforms have proved to be great tools in marketing my music and lately I did a song that’s trending on television and radio called Wah Dis Corona by Warren Park All Stars (Mannex Motsi, Lutah King and Lazzie T) produced by Lazzie T’s Big Tingz Studio in Warren Park. It has pushed my brand a lot and many thanks go to Mudziyashe for the financial support in the production of this coronavirus awareness song.  “On mitigating I have learnt that talent is not enough for any art form and profession; it has shown me that artists, especially in Zimbabwe where there is no real industry or shop to buy music for one’s pleasure, one must develop another craft which will back him/her when he/she can’t do music anymore or is retired….it has taught me to have many revenue streams to attain wealth and not focus on music alone like for example Puff Daddy who has several companies now to his name.  “This lockdown has also made me focus more on my brand development and I’m now aiming to go countrywide promoting the upkeep of sports facilities and the preservation of our culture.  “Through Wapakuda I’m now aiming to conduct music instruments lessons at our own community centre Magamba Hall.”