 IN A damning assessment, Warriors and Liverpool legend Bruce Grobbelaar has slammed Zifa’s appointment of Croatian Zdravko Logarusic as the national coach.  Grobbelaar, who also expressed his interest of coaching the Warriors in the future, said the Logarusic lack of knowledge of local football will be his biggest undoing. 800 The 62-year-old, who was capped 32 times by the warriors between 1980 and 1998, said this appointment is a clear example of how the Zifa leadership is asphyxiating the growth of the domestic game.  The Croatian was handed the hot seat at the start of the year to replace Sunday Chidzambwa, who quit following a horrific 2019 Africa Cup of Nations finals in Egypt. “What gets me is that Zimbabwean football hasn’t moved on. Yes, they get the coaches and they have disappointed. They have appointed a new coach,” Grobbelaar said during an interview with Robert Marawa on South Africa’s Radio 2000 at the weekend.  “I think he is from…and has just come from Tanzania, a Tanzanian First Division club, so they have given him a chance but does he know the players outside the country?  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Does he know that we have a Zimbabwean-English player playing for Arsenal as a striker? Will he ask for that player to come? I don’t know.  “It’s the administration side of Zimbabwean football that we need to have a look at; and if we can get that right…I think it’s a whole lot of things that we need to have a look at.”  Grobbelaar’s critical assessment comes at a time when Zifa president Felton Kamambo and his executive’s ratings are at an all-time low.  Kamambo is currently facing a probe after it was alleged he bribed Zifa councillors to vote for him in the 2018 elections which brought him into power.  The Warriors’ camp at the 2019 Afcon finals descended into total chaos as players threatened to boycott matches over unpaid allowances and appearance fees.  This is despite the government ensuring Zifa had the necessary funds to finance all the team’s basic needs at the tournament.
The association’s handling of the coronavirus (Covid-19) relief aid has also attracted a lot of criticism from clubs and their affiliates.
Although Fifa and Caf deposited the aid into the association’s foreign account, Zifa has gone onto convert the funds into the volatile local currency at a time when Zimbabwe is experiencing hyperinflation.   At the moment, Grobbelaar is the goalkeeping coach of Norwegian second-tier side Oygarden FK, and hopes to take charge of the Warriors one day.  “I would love to have the last dance with the Warriors as a coach because I feel that this group of players are the most talented that I have seen since the Dream Team that I played in,” said.  “The players that I played with were phenomenal players, the Ndlovu brothers (Peter, Adam and Madinda) Benjamin Nkonjera, Francis Shonhayi; we had beautiful players.”   