OPINION BLACK  EDWARD AS YOU walk along the broad lane, popularly known as the “Big Line”, in Glen Norah on a busy day you get this unsettling feeling that something is terribly amiss. A dirty little girl stands sobbing in the middle of the road with tears running down her cheeks and snot out of her nostrils. Passing her you see more unattended children engaged in physical acts of aggression such as biting, hitting and scratching. Some residents — including those from as far as Kunzekweguta Drive, Mukumbura Road, Chisapi and Nzungu crescents — prefer using this lane. The big line — which is a tiny metropolis of sorts, for lack of a better term — leads to the market, shops, bus stop and the main road. When writing about the big line you can’t leave out the schoolteacher whom I shall only refer to as Sir for obvious reasons. You almost certainly see Sir daily outside his house surrounded by friends. Now and again a passer-by, usually a professional on his way to or from work, stops briefly to exchange greetings with Sir. The level of exposure to Covid-19 of the children/teens and Sir is shocking — there is no social distancing, no running water, no soap, no sanitiser, no thermometer and no one wears a face mask in the big line. You begin to appreciate the vital role schools play in supporting the whole child under a supervised setup, which ensures the child’s safety and is crucial for developing social skills. You realise that interaction at school is important for the development of language, awareness of values, communication, social, emotional, and interpersonal skills. Not going to school can increase the likelihood that children engage in inappropriate behaviours such as violence, drug abuse and sexual activities. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); According to the media, the UK’s chief medical adviser Chris Whitty last week said children are more likely to be harmed by not returning to school. Sir may also fear for his own health and will need support in reducing risk in his classroom, should schools reopen, by observing WHO protocols. However, elderly teachers, who have comorbid conditions can be asked to play a supportive role in teaching since they are at higher risk of adverse illness. So questions may arise: would you rather have your child out of school playing with hordes of other children on the ‘‘big lines’’ with no observation of Covid-19 regulations whatsoever or have them in school where at least they will be learning under guidelines-managed environments and who better to teach them more about protecting themselves from the virus other than their teachers … are you comfortable sending your children to Sir, who doesn’t have personal protective equipment, for private lessons or rather have them in school? By the way the big line is just a symbolic road that many residents of different high-density suburbs — with slight variations of course — will identify with.