 Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITERM
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zwFORMER Warriors and Dynamos midfielder David “Yogi” Mandigora called on Zimbabweans to support the Sunday “Mhofu” Chidzambwa charity walk taking place tomorrow which is aimed at raising money for the fight against coronavirus (Covid-19).  Chidzambwa will walk 50 times the length of the Raylton Sports Club football pitch in Harare in the hope of raising funds to procure PPE for frontline health workers in rural areas.]    Ever since Zimbabwe recorded its first positive case of the novel virus in March, at least 104 people have lost their lives while 4 818 have been confirmed.  Even before the virus broke out, the country’s health delivery system was already on its knees due to serious funding challenges.  With the cases rising sharply on a daily basis, the local health sector has been overwhelmed by the surge.  Doctors and nurses have also gone on strike demanding better working conditions, PPE and salaries in foreign currency.  It is against this background that Chidzambwa, who captained and coached the Warriors during his playing days, has come up with this initiative.  Mandigora together with legendary former Dynamos winger George Shaya have also come on board to support Chidzambwa and will also take part in the charity walk.  With no end in sight to the spread of the virus, Mandigora hopes the charity event will get the desired support from everyone.   “No donation is small. Whatever you have will go a long way in helping. This virus is real and it’s killing people. The numbers have spiked lately in the country and this is the only way we can play our part in helping fight this pandemic as football personalities.”  Mandigora, who was crowned the Soccer Star of the Year in 1980, commended the effort health workers are putting in during this difficult period.   “I have seen some pictures of doctors improvising by putting on different kind of items as PPE and this shows us the extra mile they are willing to go in their quest to save lives.  “It’s only fair that we play our part as the public and try to raise funds so that our health workers get the necessary equipment they need.”  In September 2017, Mandigora, who suffers from diabetes, had his right leg amputated right above the knee and has been wheelchair-bound ever since.  Despite being physically challenged, Mandigora has vowed to complete as many laps as possible tomorrow.   Speaking to the Daily News earlier this week, Chidzambwa called on those fortunate enough to come on board and donate to this noble cause.   At the height of Covid-19 in the United Kingdom, a 100-year-old former serviceman Tom Moore raised a staggering £32 million for National Health Service (NHS) staff after reaching his goal of walking 100 laps of his garden.  Chidzambwa and his colleagues hope to make a similar impact with tomorrow’s charity walk.  