 Mugove Tafirenyika
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zw IN A move that caught many by surprise, President Emmerson Mnangagwa yesterday fired Energy and Power Development minister Fortune Chasi, pictured,  and also appointed two new ministers, the Daily News reports.  The unexpected sacking of Chasi came amid ongoing chaos at Zesa Holdings, where the former minister was involved in a fierce war with executive chairman Sydney Gata over the running and control of the power utility.
Chasi was replaced by the relatively unknown Zanu PF Member of Parliament for Muzarabani North, Soda Zhemu.  At the same time, Mnangagwa also announced the appointment of the well-regarded chief executive officer of the Zimbabwe Agricultural Society (Zas), Anxious Masuka, as the country’s new Agriculture minister — who takes over from the late Perrance Shiri, who succumbed to the lethal coronavirus last month.  Chasi became the third minister to be fired by Mnangagwa, after former ministers Prisca Mupfumira (Tourism) and Obadiah Moyo (Health and Child Care) were jettisoned after being mired in allegations of corruption.   Zhemu worked as an accountant at Cottco Sanyati until 2004, and later joined Alliance Ginneries as a regional manager — before retiring in 2017.  Chasi recently raised eyebrows after he ordered that Intratek, owned by maverick businessman Wicknell Chivayo, be allowed to go ahead with the construction of a 100-megawatt solar plant in Gwanda. Chivayo, who is referred to by his close associates as Sir Wicknell, was controversially awarded the multi-million dollar tender for the Gwanda Solar Project a few years ago — and has done little on the project to date. Surprisingly, Chivayo’s company was also awarded a further $73 million contract for the refurbishment of the Harare Power Station — in addition to the $163 million contract for the restoration of the Munyati Power Station and the $248 million contract for the Gairezi power project by the ZPC, a subsidiary of Zesa Holdings. Gata’s board was said to be resisting the continuation of Intratek on the Gwanda solar project.
Meanwhile, Mnangagwa moved to fill the vacant Agriculture minister post by appointing the much-respected Masuka into his Cabinet. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Announcing the appointment, Sibanda said Masuka was a founding fellow of the Zimbabwe Academy of Sciences in 2004. “He has also been involved in consultancy work to projects in fields of agriculture, forestry, environment, public health and rural development, both here in Zimbabwe, in the Sadc region and beyond. Masuka holds a Doctor of Philosophy and Bachelor of Science (Honours) degree in Agriculture majoring in Crop Science from the University of Zimbabwe.