 by Tatenda Chimbwanda  IMMUNISATION is an essential health service which may be affected by the current Covid-19 pandemic. Disruption of immunisation services, even for brief periods, can result in increased numbers of susceptible individuals and raise the likelihood of outbreak-prone Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPDs) such as measles. In 2019, measles caused more than 6 000 deaths in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), a country which was fighting its largest Ebola outbreak. The main objective of the essential services support conducted between June 26 and July 2 in Bikita, Chivi, Mwenezi and Chiredzi Districts by MoHCC and WHO was to assess the continuity of essential services provision in the province. MoHCC, WHO and Masvingo Provincial EPI officers conducted a desk review of immunisation performance data from January to April 2020 in the province. Furthermore, MoHCC and WHO visited Mwenezi and Chiredzi districts to understand the challenges being faced, brainstorm on mitigation measures and identify support needed. One of the main reasons for their low performance in EPI was due to health facilities proximity to the new settlements in both Chiredzi and Mwenezi. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); MoHCC and WHO officials went on to visit Bikita and Chivi districts health facilities in order to understand the reasons behind their high performance and to identify best practices and lessons to take and use in other districts nationally. Best practices that were observed include consistent and timely monitoring of performance of immunisation services and prioritisation of essential services provision in Chivi district. There was also an integration of training on routine services with Covid-19 training in Chivi district. Strong partnerships and collaborations were also observed in Bikita and Chivi districts. Concluding the support visit, MoHCC and WHO made key recommendations to Masvingo Provinces’ EPI activities. The recommendations include expanding on ‘my village my home strategy’ in all districts. Another recommendation was for MoHCC HQ to urgently work on availing funding and logistical support for outreach services to avoid further disruption of EPI services. Outlining one of the key lessons learnt from visiting Masvingo Province Dr Maxwell Rupfutse, WHO EPI Focal Point said: “Early involvement of stakeholders, community leaders and communities during challenging situations such as Covid-19 pandemic facilitates building resilience of health systems and enhances continued provision of services.” 