 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw WOMEN’S rights and advocacy group, Musasa Project, has revealed shocking figures of gender-based violence (GBV) since authorities imposed the current national coronavirus lockdown.  It said yesterday that it had assisted a whopping 10 000 victims of GBV in the last four months alone — adding that since the national lockdown began, women had been stuck indoors with their abusers for long periods of time.   “Since the onset of the pandemic, all the Musasa shelter centres across the country have noted an upsurge in reported cases of GBV,” the rights and advocacy group said in a joint statement with Oxfam.  “Evidence of this worrying trend is shown in the statistics covering the period between April 1 and July 11, where Musasa has assisted a total of 10 849 survivors across its various platforms.  “The violence against women happens everywhere … Therefore, it can happen to any woman, affecting her general well-being and preventing her from fully participating in society,” it added.  Recently, the United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) also said the country’s GBV cases had increased by 70 percent since the beginning of the national lockdown in March.  Meanwhile, Shamwari Yemwanasikana founder and director, Ekenia Chifamba, said they were concerned that the Covid-19 crisis had resulted in increased early child marriages and teenage pregnancies.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “This has also resulted in the number of child marriages spiking. Some parents are marrying off their children, whilst other girls are also eloping and running away from economic hardships back home.  “We call upon the government to provide food aid for both the urban and rural populace so as to curtail the proliferation of many social ills brought about by poverty,” Chifamba said.  “It is our greatest fear that when schools reopen, the greater majority of the girls would not be able to go back to school as they would have been married off or eloped. “It is also in this light that most children no longer have anything to do as the majority cannot afford online lessons being offered by private schools.  “This has also contributed to the increase in teenage pregnancies. Some of the girls are resorting to backyard abortions, exposing them to a plethora of challenges,” Chifamba said further.  Before the advent of Covid-19, Zimbabwe’s Health Demographic Survey indicated that more than 35 percent of married women aged between 15 and 49 experienced spousal violence — while one in three girls was married off before turning 18, often to older men.  Zimbabwe has been under lockdown since the end of March, when authorities introduced tough measures aimed at combating the spread of the lethal coronavirus.  Authorities have since further tightened the stay-at-home order by imposing a dusk-to-dawn curfew — following a huge spike in the number of people succumbing to the killer virus, which is now running riot in the country.  