by Viniel Deredza  Whenever they feel undone by decisions made by match officials, Bosso fans have on several occasions taken matters into their own hands. For many years, their club has paid thousands of dollars in fines and other costs associated with damages to stadia and properties. Club chairperson Kenneth Mhlope blasted the rowdy fans as calls grew for the identification and punishment of those responsible. An inquiry into the disturbances ironically absolved the supporters and instead pointed a finger at the security details, with a local paper indicating that, ….. “the referee and match commissioner’s reports indicating that Bosso fans threw stones and invaded the pitch were rejected by the PSL disciplinary committee after viewing video evidence of the disturbances. The disciplinary committee also reportedly rejected referee Brighton Chimene and match commissioner Masimba Chihowa’s evidence as unreliable. The report had put all blame on the supporters without taking into consideration other factors. Bosso were found guilty of the lesser offence of missile throwing and fined $2 000. These are some of the incidents when the club has suffered unnecessary losses due to their fans’ bad behaviour, thus draining the already lean club coffers. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); But for all the negative images associated with these fans — one can be forgiven for saying “save for the rowdy behaviour, this is an avid lot who love their team with a passion.” Last week, Mhlope came out to thank fans dotted around the globe for a gesture that made headlines and proved that “they are not only about rowdy behaviour after all.” The campaign initially raised $100 000 in May before a further $300 000 was deposited into the Highlanders account in June. Nyathi then announced the fundraising campaign had realised a further $410 000, which would go towards clearing the debt in total. It has been said before and I will say it again, “Bosso has probably the most ardent fans in the country” and they unfortunately overreact when they feel something is not going right whether about their team or match officials, the coach or both. This act, happening especially during these difficult times when the world is grappling with the effects of the coronavirus pandemic shows there is power in unity and that a lot can be achieved whenever people unite for a common cause. Bosso fans should now take pride in the fact that they have proved beyond doubt they only want the best for their club and learn to control their emotions and realise that violence cannot solve anything. In the same vein, it is crucial for authorities to make serious inquiries into concerns raised — especially against match officials. Caf and Fifa have, on several occasions, repeatedly snubbed local match officials for international engagements like Afcon, the Olympic Games and the World Cup which calls for serious introspection and a complete change of culture. Kudos to you Bosso fans for the great gesture and a great lesson for the football fraternity in the country — you have proved your undoubted support for your great club.