  THE Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) has directed mobile money operators to immediately close all multiple wallets and allow just one wallet per individual. THE Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) has directed mobile money operators to immediately close all multiple wallets and allow just one wallet per individual.  This came out from the midterm monetary policy statement released yesterday by RBZ governor John Mangudya in which he also said retailers and other service providers would be permitted to continue operating merchant wallets to allow the public to pay for goods and services.  “Merchants shall not be allowed to make payments from their wallets. E-value held in merchant wallets shall be liquidated to the merchant’s bank account in the mobile money sector,” Mangudya said.  The RBZ governor said a forensic audit carried out by the central bank had revealed malpractices such as “creation of mobile money accounts using fictitious and unverified identification particulars; creation of money on the platforms (overdrafts and fraudulent /fictitious credits) not backed by balances in the mobile money trust accounts; system infrastructure inadequacies and weak anti-money laundering controls and failure to comply with, including wilful disregard for, regulatory directives”. RBZ governor, John Mangudya  Mangudya also expressed concern over malpractices by some business entities that are charging for goods and services at rates way above that obtained on the auction to the detriment of consumers.  In order to curb such delinquent behaviour and to enforce compliance, Mangudya said the RBZ would establish a toll free line through which the public and consumers can report to the Bank such malpractices and other foreign currency related transgressions.  “The measures will foster stability in prices and exchange rate consistent with the trend that has been witnessed since adoption of the foreign exchange auction system in June 2020.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The Bank is committed to containing fluctuations in the exchange rate within a low band through market-based means and monetary policy instruments under its purview, notably, reserve money targeting.  “The ensuing stability of the exchange rate will enhance the value of the Zimbabwe dollar as a store of value in an environment where business and consumers use the exchange rate as the nominal anchor. This will in turn help reduce demand for foreign currency for store of value and thus enhancing current measures to stabilise prices,” said Mangudya.  The central bank boss said due to recent developments on the foreign exchange auction, blended annual inflation is forecast to gradually fall to 249 percent by December 2020 and further to single digit levels by December 2021.
“The liquidity mopping effect of the auction coupled with continued restraint on money supply growth is expected to dampen inflationary pressures in the economy, culminating in a sustained trajectory in the year-on-year inflation as shown in the post auction,” he said. Meanwhile, Mangudya also directed that mobile money agents currently holding value in suspended and frozen wallets shall be allowed to liquidate the funds to their bank accounts, “upon the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) having satisfied itself of the legitimacy of the source of funds”.  “Agent wallets are no longer serving any legitimate purpose and are now being used primarily for illegal foreign exchange transactions. Agents’ mobile money wallets are therefore abolished, with immediate effect,” said Mangudya.  Recently, the RBZ issued a directive to freeze accounts belonging to agents with transactions over $100 000 amid suspicions by the government that they were involved in shady deals suspected to have been fuelling exchange rate volatility.  Meanwhile, the central bank also moved to help civil servants access their Covid-19 allowances after it directed all banks to adhere to the requirements to open domestic FCA accounts for government workers.  This comes as civil servants are facing challenges utilising the US$75 deposited into their accounts by the government as a flat non-taxable Covid-19 monthly allowance amid reports that some employees are yet to be issued with bank cards by financial institutions. Mangudya directed all banks to comply with the requirement to enable the public sector employees to access their US$ allowances in the manner and form expected by the government.  “Banks should make it easy for these public servants to have access to foreign exchange cards and to permit them to transact in the normal course of business like any other ordinary customers of banks with adherence to the usual Know Your Customer (KYC) principles.  “Accordingly, banks are directed to submit returns to the Bank by 31 August 2020 on the banking programme(s) that they have put in place to address the requirement for ease of access to Covid-19 allowance by the public sector employees,” Mangudya said.  The government is paying civil servants a flat non-taxable Covid-19 allowance of US$75 while pensioners who retired from the civil service will also get a flat non-taxable Covid-19 allowance of US$30 per month.