 Sindiso Mhlophe STAFF WRITER mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw  PRESIDENT Cyril Ramaphosa conferred with President Emmerson Mnangagwa before he appointed his two special envoys to Zimbabwe last week — amid allegations of human rights violations in the country — it has been confirmed. Presidential spokesperson George Charamba told the Daily News yesterday that Mnangagwa had “nothing to hide” — and would thus engage with Ramaphosa’s envoys in an “open and transparent manner”. This comes after Ramaphosa appointed former South African vice president Baleka Mbete and ex-Local Government minister Sydney Mufamadi as his special envoys to Harare last week, “to identify possible ways in which South Africa can assist Zimbabwe”. He also dismissed the #ZimbabweLivesMatter movement which has attracted international attention, describing it as a “ghost movement with no tangible backing on the ground”. All this comes as the government is under huge local, regional and international pressure over alleged human rights violations, and a recent crackdown on government critics. However, the government has dismissed the claims, saying that gory videos and images circulating on social media have been “doctored” to smear the image of the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); In the meantime, Ramaphosa’s cautious intervention in the Zimbabwean crisis has got off to a rocky start, with the opposition warning at the weekend that they will not be railroaded to accept any deals that they disagree with, as had happened a decade ago when the country’s unity government was put in place. This came as well-placed sources in South Africa told the Daily News’s sister paper, the Daily News On Sunday that Ramaphosa’s surprise move to appoint the special envoys followed preliminary talks within his government and the ruling African National Congress (ANC) about how Pretoria could encourage national dialogue among Zimbabweans — including between Zanu PF and some of its self-exiled former officials. The opposition said on Saturday that they expect any dialogue that may take place as a result of South Africa’s intervention to lead to comprehensive political and economic reforms — including sweeping changes in the country’s security sector. Tough-talking MDC Alliance vice president, Tendai Biti, also said they would not make the same mistakes that they made in 2008 when the MDC was forced into an uneasy coalition government with Zanu PF, having won the hotly-disputed elections of that year. At the same time, political analysts and the Church have also cast doubts on the latest mission to try and finally end Zimbabwe’s worsening crises. University of Zimbabwe political science lecturer, Eldred Masunungure, is among the analysts who have warned that Ramaphosa’s mediation effort is likely to fail because the government does not accept that there is a problem in the country. “Ramaphosa holds an important position as AU chairperson, and he has thus been forced by circumstances to act. “He cannot afford to fold his arms when a neighbour is burning … this is also an indication that the continent has heard the cries of Zimbabweans and there is an appetite to act. “However, the fact that the Zimbabwean leadership does not agree that there is a crisis makes it difficult for him. How does he proceed when their interpretation of the problem is running parallel?” Masunungure told the Daily News on Friday. Similarly, churches have also warned that SA’s mediation efforts would not necessarily resolve the country’s socio-economic and political problems if Zimbabweans did not take the government to task and speak with one voice. The secretary general of the Zimbabwe Council of Churches (ZCC), Kenneth Mtata, said the solution to the country’s long-standing problems could only come from Zimbabweans. 