Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zwAMID the country’s deepening political and economic crises, church leaders have once again implored President Emmerson Mnangagwa, pictured, to take the initiative to launch inclusive national dialogue to heal the nation.  Speaking to the Daily News yesterday, a number of prominent clerics said as the situation continued to take a turn for the worse, it was now even more important for Zimbabwe’s leaders to hold talks if the nation was to avoid total chaos.  This comes as the country’s opposition and pro-democracy groups have threatened to unfurl more protests, after last week’s planned mass demonstrations flopped.  The fresh calls for broad-based dialogue also come as several high-profile people and other interest groups have been calling for Mnangagwa to end his long-drawn out feud with MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa, in the country’s interest.  The outspoken leader of the Zimbabwe Divine Destiny Church Ancelimo Magaya, was among the church leaders who told the Daily News yesterday that dialogue was now the only way to go.   “As the church, which is a voice of conscience to the nation, we observe that there is increasing polarity between the State and the masses — with rising tension, mistrust and suspicion, as well as continued arrests where government uses the lockdown regulations to thwart dissenting voices.  “The recent crackdown on the organisers of the July 31 demonstration against corruption while the corrupt remain free is diabolic to say the least,” he added. The general secretary of the Evangelical Fellowship of Zimbabwe (EFZ), Blessings Makwara, also said there was now an urgent need for all Zimbabweans to come together to defuse the escalating political tension in the country.  On his part, the administrator of the Harare Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Sacred Heart — Father Kennedy Muguti — said it was time for Zimbabwe’s leaders to put aside their political differences to heal growing divisions in the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); This comes as Friday’s planned mass protests failed to take off, after authorities made heavy deployments of security forces around the country. At the same time, security forces have maintained a heavy presence around the country, amid talk of more protests by the opposition and pro-democracy groups. All this also comes as Zimbabwe is under a dusk-to-dawn curfew that was imposed by authorities to try and combat the spread of the lethal coronavirus — which is now running amok in the country. Both Chamisa and Mnangagwa have previously said that they were interested in dialogue, although nothing concrete has happened — primarily because of differences over the form and platform on which the talks should take place. On his part, Mnangagwa has been consistent that any talks with Chamisa should be held under the Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) — where he regularly holds meetings with fringe opposition leaders. Chamisa himself has repeatedly ruled out joining Polad — demanding instead direct dialogue with Mnangagwa.At one time, both men appeared ready to finally end their brawling when former South African leader Thabo Mbeki held talks with them last year over the country’s worsening economic rot. Mbeki — who helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between former opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and Robert Mugabe, who are both late — was in the country in December last year, to try and nudge Mnangagwa and Chamisa to hold direct talks.