 AMID escalating political tensions in the country, President Emmerson Mnangagwa issued another ominous warning against the country’s opposition yesterday, vowing to deal mercilessly with alleged terrorists among its ranks, the Daily News reports.
In addition, Mnangagwa claimed that there were rogue elements in the country who had allegedly been working with external groups to derail his government ever since he took office in November 2017 — following the dramatic ouster from power of the late former president Robert Mugabe through a popular military coup. This comes as the government has been accused of mimicking the old ways of Mugabe’s administrations, amid reports of human rights violations in the country as Zimbabwe’s political and economic situation continues to deteriorate. It also comes as Zimbabwe is suffering from the triple whammy of the country’s long-standing economic crisis, the negative effects of the global coronavirus pandemic and the severe regional drought which has left more than half of the population facing starvation. “My administration remains committed to enhancing co-operation with friends and partners in the international community, as we entrench democracy and rule of law within our jurisdiction.
“In this regard, we will continue to strive to achieve the delicate balance between the maintenance of peace and security, and on the one hand protecting civil liberties and individual rights. “In all circumstances, public officials and security services will carry out their duties with appropriate astuteness and resolve.
“The protection of the right to life is paramount, especially in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and machinations by destructive terrorist opposition groupings,” Mnangagwa said. “Let us, therefore, pledge individually and collectively, to defend our country, to be productive, to grow our economy and never to tear our motherland apart by dividing its people. “In unison we must proclaim that enough is enough. This is Zimbabwe, our motherland, and we will defend her from any form of attack. He said his government had faced many hurdles and attacks since its inauguration, including alleged divisive politics of opposition elements, economic sanctions, cyclones, droughts and now the Covid-19 pandemic.
“Added to this, is economic aggression, local currency manipulation and detractors who fear the inevitable imminent success of our reforms. “All this was meant to undermine our projected economic growth and stability.
“As a result, we have had to constantly recalibrate our compass to ensure that we remain on course and that the standard life of the majority in our society gets better and better,” Mnangagwa said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Although our progress has been slowed down, rest assured we shall achieve our objectives. We will overcome. We will defeat the attack and stop the bleeding of our economy. “We will overcome attempts at destabilisation of our society by a few rogue Zimbabweans acting in league with foreign detractors.
“The reforms, opening up, liberalisation and modernisation we began shall continue with accelerated pace.
“Those who promote hate and disharmony will never win. The bad apples that have attempted to divide our people and to weaken our systems will be flushed out. Good shall triumph over evil,” Mnangagwa said further. “The dark forces, both inside and outside our borders have tempered with our growth and prosperity for too long.
“They have thrived on dividing us. Let us as a people embrace the call for patriotism, hard work, transparency, accountability, love, unity and peace. “Now is the time to embrace the opportunities before us with optimism and determination to transform and modernise our society. The door to the old manner of doing things is shut.  The corrupt way is closed,” Mnangagwa added. He said despite the brickbats that his administration had taken, it was still committed to engaging and re-engaging with the international community, while implementing political and economic reforms. “Our political reforms have equally been guided by these twin concepts. We repealed and replaced Posa (Public Order Security Act) and Aippa (Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act) in the spirit of these ideals. All this comes as Zimbabwe is in the grip of a huge economic crisis, its worst in a decade — which has stirred anger among its long suffering people. Political tensions have remained high following last week’s attempts by the opposition and pro-democracy groups to hold anti-government protests. The planned mass demonstrations failed to take off after authorities made heavy deployments of security forces around the country.
And security forces have maintained a heavy presence around the country, amid talk of more protests by the opposition and pro-democracy groups. This also comes as Zimbabwe is currently under a rigid lockdown, which includes a dusk-to- dawn curfew, imposed by authorities in a bid to combat the spread of the lethal coronavirus in the country. Both Chamisa and Mnangagwa have previously said that they were interested in dialogue, although nothing concrete has happened — primarily because of differences over the form and platform on which the talks should take place.
On his part, Mnangagwa has been adamant that any talks with Chamisa should be held under the Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) — where he regularly holds meetings with fringe opposition leaders. Chamisa himself has repeatedly ruled out joining Polad — demanding instead direct dialogue with Mnangagwa.
At one time, both men appeared ready to finally end their brawling when former South African leader Thabo Mbeki held talks with them last year, over the country’s worsening economic rot. Mbeki — who helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between former opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and Mugabe, who are both late — was in the country in December last year, to try and nudge Mnangagwa and Chamisa to hold direct talks.