 LIFESTYLE WRITER ZUVVA, a studio and retail operation at Sam Levy’s Village in Borrowdale, Harare is proud to have dressed celebrities who include Victor Kunonga, Prudence Katomeni-Mbofana, the late Chiwoniso Maraire and Brenda Fassie. It has also dressed contestants in Miss World/Zimbabwe, Miss Universe/ Zimbabwe, Miss World Tourism/ Zimbabwe, Miss Malaika/ Zimbabwe, Miss World Deaf/ Zimbabwe competitions. Leading this success is Joyce Chimanye whose almost three decades in the fashion industry have propelled her to leadership status in her field.   Describing herself as a fashion creative, Chimanye entered the world of designer clothing in 1991, trained in Cape Town and worked for a number of garment manufacturers in Harare before establishing a fashion brand called Zuvva. Chimanye said design was in her blood. “In 2016 I started the important task of teaching others to design and construct garments through the setting up of the Zuvva School of Fashion, which is also at Sam Levy’s Village.   googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Like Chimanye, newcomers will have to focus on a set vision, continuously work hard towards that vision and not despise small beginnings, as well as see beyond the challenges Zimbabwe faces to brighter future.   One of her most satisfying experiences is working with orphaned children in Harare through a programme run by the Zuvva School of Fashion.  “It’s called Fashion for Development, created to give disadvantaged children the opportunity to receive free training and mentorship at Zuvva Studio during the school holidays,” she said.   Chimanye also treasures being involved in the development of medium and small enterprises owned and run in the main by women, hoping to improve quality, efficiency, marketing and business skills.  Zuvva recognises the importance of adding value to locally-grown and processed cotton and participation and being in the local value chain surrounding it.  Chimanye is at present working with other professionals in the Zimbabwean fashion industry in the formation of the Fashion Council of Zimbabwe, which will promote fashion-related understanding, support and action for the purpose of developing the industry. Chimanye has won accolades for her professional success and impact, and was winner of the Zimbabwe National Chamber of Commerce Art and Culture Award 2018. She was a nominee for a Zimbabwe International Women’s Award in 2018, in a competition run from Birmingham in the United Kingdom.  She is founder and trustee of the Vana Vedu Trust, which focuses on the welfare of orphaned, neglected and disadvantaged children in Zimbabwe, and was founder and designer of Mabwe, a hand-printed Zimbabwean fabric line inspired by Zimbabwean flora, fauna, culture and heritage. The Mabwe Print was launched at Hifa in April 2017. Giving advice to other aspiring fashion designers, she says the foundation is creativity soundly backed up by proper technical and business training. A fan of DStv’s Fashion One channel, she finds it a “very informative source, showing us where fashion is, globally as well as on our own continent.” “We see who is doing what, as well as gain an insight into areas of possible trade and collaboration,” she said.
Chimanye and her husband Ed have two sons, Tapiwa, 26, and Munya,22, both at university. 