 Blessing Masakadza
STAFF WRITER
masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw THE State wants land developer Felix Munyaradzi denied bail saying from Saturday the day he initially appeared in court, 50 more people have come to register complaints against him.  This was said by the investigating officer Misheck Ngorima in bolstering the State’s opposition to bail saying more home seekers are coming out to register complaints against him.  It also emerged yesterday that the police went to arrest Munyaradzi armed with AK47 rifles and pistols which the investigating officer said are tools of their trade and necessary for their security.  Munyaradzi faces four counts of fraud involving housing stands and he was remanded to today for bail ruling.
The State alleges that sometime in 2015, Delatfin entered into a swap deal with one of the complainants Delish Nguwaya for residential stands in exchange for a Toyota Prado.  The court heard Delatfin sold three stands in Sandton Park, Mt Hampden worth US$50 000 and Nguwaya surrendered his car in return before signing an agreement of sale on February 27, 2018 with Munyaradzi.
However, Munyaradzi allegedly sold the residential stands to third parties. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  When Nguwaya discovered the breach of agreement; he agreed to be compensated with eight smaller stands in the same area.
It is alleged that Munyaradzi then sold one of the eight stands without Nguwaya’s knowledge.  The second complainant was Maria Gabaza who bought a stand from Munyaradzi in April this year.
According to the State, on April 20 Delatfin was offered 120 hectares of land by the Local Government ministry for residential development.  It is alleged that before he could comply fully with the requirements of the offer letter, Munyaradzi sold one of the stands to Gabaza for US$18 000 claiming to be in full ownership of the land.  The third complainant is one Ronald Dondo who reportedly lost $US15 600.
The other complainant Erasmus Makodza allegedly lost US$40 000 to Munyaradzi after purchasing a housing stand  in Sandton Mt Hampden which he later discovered that it had been sold to one Nyongo.  Through his lawyer Wellington Pasipanodya, Munyaradzi argues he is a proper candidate for bail as he is still innocent until proven guilty.  He further argues that he is not a flight risk as he knew about the allegations last year and never attempted to flee.