 WHAT we in Iran, the target of a vicious and indiscriminate sanctions regime, have seen from the current United States (US) administration is quite straightforward: There is no grand vision for an alternative global community. The US’s fickleness and unpredictability have nothing to do with masterful implementation of game theory. Rather, whether it comes to its (mis)management of Covid-19 at home or its undermining of peace and stability abroad, the current regime in Washington has no real plan except to frontally assault those who stand by the rule of law. The US handling of UN Security Council Resolution 2231, which endorsed, and is inseparable from, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), commonly known as the Iran nuclear deal, is a case in point. However, in May of 2018 the US administration declared that it had unilaterally opted for “ceasing participation” in the JCPOA. As I warned the Security Council last month, this status quo is neither desirable nor sustainable. We are thus at a crossroads. This deeply malicious US behaviour is evident throughout the UN, where it seeks to use the UN itself to effectively destroy the world body. There are several key issues and consequences to consider in this equation. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Unless all powers respect the principles which the council was created to embody, it cannot perform its duties, nor can any nation acknowledge its authority. For both superpowers of the past century witnessed the unravelling of their international influence in their military defeat in Afghanistan, a country with a GDP that is 14 times smaller than Apple Inc.’s annual revenue. We have also seen in past years how the US administration has—in parallel with its assault on international institutions and accords—sought to supplant international law with its own domestic laws. While Iran has proven its resilience and decisive response to coercive bullying, I am confident that—in the next few critical weeks and months—members of the Security Council will refute the campaign struggle of a beleaguered US administration to turn what was the diplomatic achievement of the 21st Century into an exercise in futility, and in the process annihilate what is left of multilateralism and international law. 