 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw UNICEF has revealed that Zimbabwe is among countries struggling to improve breastfeeding as the world commemorates World Breastfeeding Week 2020.  This comes as the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has warned that the country was likely to experience up to 50 percent increase in child malnutrition owing to the country’s worsening economic crisis and the coronavirus pandemic (Covid-19). “Zimbabwe is still struggling to improve breastfeeding indicators. Less than two thirds, 59 percent, of children are breastfed within the first one hour after birth and only 42 percent of children zero to six months of age are being exclusively breastfed.  “Globally, scaling up breastfeeding could prevent 2 000 maternal deaths, 823 000 child deaths, and US$302 billion in economic losses every year,” Unicef Zimbabwe said yesterday.  In a joint statement, Unicef and the World Health Organisation (WHO) called on governments to protect and promote women’s access to skilled breastfeeding counselling as a critical component of breastfeeding support.   “And it forms part of a sustainable food system. But while breastfeeding is a natural process, it is not always easy. Mothers need support both to get started and to sustain breastfeeding.  “Skilled counselling services can ensure that mothers and families receive this support, along with the information, the advice, and the reassurance they need to nourish their babies optimally,” the organisations said.  The organisations further said that counselling could empower women to overcome challenges and prevent feeding and care practices that might interfere with optimal breastfeeding, such as the provision of unnecessary liquids, foods, and breastmilk substitutes to infants and young children.  “Skilled breastfeeding counselling can be provided by different actors including health care professionals, lactation counsellors and peer support providers, and in a variety of settings– in health facilities or clinics, through home visits or community programmes, in person or remotely.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “During the Covid-19 pandemic, it is even more important to find innovative solutions to ensure that access to these essential services is not disrupted and that families continue to receive the breastfeeding counselling they need,” the organisations further said. 