Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zwTHE $10 million Covid-19 relief fund for artists unveiled last month by government to cushion them against the effects of the national lockdown is still to reach the beneficiaries, the Daily News reports.  This comes as the deadline for the Arts Relief Fund applications was July 31.
On July 10, acting minister of Sport and Arts Paul Mavima availed the sum of $20 million dollars for the Sports and Arts sectors.   “Each of these sectors will receive $10 million dollars, courtesy of the Ministry of Finance…the ministry notes that the emergence of the Covid-19 pandemic has brought an unexpected break to the flow in the entire ecosystem of sports and cultural and creative industries in the country.  “This sudden cessation of programmes and scheduling of events has had a direct sting on the major products of the industries.  “Agreeably, sports and arts are reliable sources of income for many in the country and the disruptions of various calendar events due to Coid-19 have prompted government to intervene by way of a relief fund.  “This is a temporary intervention while broad and sustainable interventions will be worked on for the two industries,” said Mavhima.  Zimbabwe Musicians Union chairperson Edith WeUtonga said her organisation and its members are still to receive the money.   Musicians who have applied were supposed to receive about $7 500 each. The money was supposed to be given as a once-off grant to qualifying beneficiaries.  Singer and director of Jenaguru Arts Centre, Clive Malunga said it was puzzling because the arts sector hasn’t received that money.  “We are not sure what happened to the funds; we are still looking forward to it.  I understand the funds will be distributed through National Arts Council of Zimbabwe although there is no word from the arts body as of now.”  Rooftop Promotions producer Daves Guzha said he is not aware of any of his stable’s artistes who have received the grant.    Mutare-based sungura musician Hosiah Chipanga also doubts if the money will reach the intended beneficiaries.  “We have applied for the grants but there is no communication ever since. We are just sitting in the dark and we are not sure if the money will ever reach us,” Chipanga said.  Norton -based mbira musician Florence ‘Lioness’ Nyamazana had also applied for the grants but nothing has yet materialised.   Dancers Association of Zimbabwe (Daz) president Hapaguti ‘‘Harpers’’ Mapimhidze told the Daily News he and some of his members applied for the grants well before the deadline but they were turned down.   “I failed to get adequate information pertaining to the issue. Actually I was in the dark and up to now I do not know what it was all about,” he said.  Contacted for comment, officials at the Ministry of Arts tossed this reporter from one office to the other until they referred all questions to the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (Nacz).  Contacted for comment yesterday, Nacz director Nicholas Moyo was also not forthcoming and could only say: “I have no comment!”.  