 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority (Zera) has hiked fuel prices by over 30 percent, a move described by analysts as likely to have ripple effects and result in prices of basic commodities and services shooting up again.  This comes as prices of basic commodities had started stabilising after the recent introduction of a foreign currency auction system and other measures.  In a statement, Zera indicated that the price of diesel had increased from $62,77 to $83,36 while that of petrol had moved from $71,62 to $93,15.   Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers Association (CZRA) president Denford Mutashu said the latest price increase would likely trigger price increases of basic goods and services.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Any fuel adjustment has a direct impact on the prices of basic goods and services and in particular in the retail sector. “This is because it affects production costs for manufacturers, deliveries and ultimately the retail price.
“For those retailers who can deliver goods for themselves, fuel price hikes increase procurement costs by four to 10 percent, while for those who depend on deliveries the cost increases by 10 to 20 percent depending on the size of the business,” Mutashu said.  Mutashu further said while the price of fuel being sold in the local currency has increased; the fuel is currently unavailable at sell points in the country as most service stations prefer to sell in United States (US) dollars.  “As a country we have adopted a multicurrency system but that system is currently not functional especially in the fuel sector. Most service stations are selling fuel in US dollars and as a result it is difficult to find fuel being sold using the local currency.  “If the multicurrency system is going to be functional we need to see fuel in the local currency being available in as much as it is available in forex,” he said.   “Retailers are being forced to move around the country collecting different products.
“This means they are incurring additional costs and in turn they have no choice but to increase the prices of goods in order to meet their costs,” he added.  Top economist Tony Hawkins also expressed similar concerns, indicating that the government was still a long way from achieving price stability. “We have been seeing that the local currency has been losing value against the US dollar even on the newly launched foreign exchange auction system.  “For this week the dollar landed at US$1:80 and judging from this in the next couple of months we could be at 1:100 and 1:150.  “As long as the exchange rate has not stabilised prices of basic commodities and goods will also not stabilise because the economy is still dollarised,” Hawkins said.  “Even though fuel being sold in the local currency is very scarce, those who are still able to access it will feel the impact of the latest price increase.  “As such they might also respond by increasing the prices of basic commodities and goods in order to meet their costs,” he added.  This comes as Zimbabwe has been experiencing its worst economic crisis in a decade which has been characterised by continued price hikes, hyperinflation and shortages of fuel and foreign currency.  