 THE World Bank says Zimbabwe is expected to be among the two biggest winners in terms of real income gains from the full implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA).  The AfCFTA pact was created by the African Continental Free Trade Agreement among 54 of the 55 African Union nations and is the largest free trade area in the world in terms of the number of participating countries since the formation of the World Trade Organisation.  In its report, titled Economic and Distributional Effects of AfCFTA, the World Bank said real income gains from full implementation of AfCFTA could increase by seven percent by 2035, or nearly US$450 billion, but the aggregate numbers mask the heterogeneity of impacts across countries and sectors.   While the continent’s real income would increase by 7 percent by 2035, Zimbabwe will register dynamic gains of 12 percent.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  At the lower end are a few countries clustered around a gain of two percent, including Madagascar, Malawi, and Mozambique. The gains are very closely related to the initial level of trade barriers and trade costs,” the report said.  According to the report, Zimbabwe will also register a notable reduction of time in customs due to TFA implementation to 15 and a reduction in iceberg trade costs to 10.   However, Zimbabwe has already indicated that it will start implementing provisions of the African AFCTA after 15 years to give the local manufacturing industry an opportunity to recover.  Foreign Affairs and International Trade minister Sibusiso Moyo said implementing the rules right away might stifle the local industry’s recovery.   “However, Zimbabwe will be spared for the next fifteen years because if we do that right away, we become a dumping ground of goods because at the moment we are not producing enough,” he said in January.  The creation of the vast trade block of 1,2 billion people with an estimated market value of 3,2 trillion United States dollars is regarded as one of the greatest achievements by the African Union over the last century and is regarded as the biggest highlight of Africa’s renaissance  According to the World Bank report, the agreement would reshape markets and economies across the region, leading to the creation of new industries and the expansion of key sectors. Overall economic gains would vary, with the largest gains going to countries that currently have high trade costs.