 Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zwCHANCES of the 2020 soccer season start are increasingly becoming slimmer by the day, at least judging by the rising number of positive coronavirus cases.  The Premier Soccer League (PSL)  and the Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) had earmarked next month for the 2020 season to start.
However, the PSL fears the plans to resume might be jeopardised since Zimbabwe is experiencing a sharp rise in positive cases of the lethal virus.  As of yesterday, the country had recorded 69 deaths while confirmed cases had risen beyond 3 100.
Speaking to the Daily News in the wake of rising cases, PSL chief executive Kenny Ndebele said he was concerned the September plans for football to start would be affected.   At the moment, the Medical Committee is working on a comprehensive framework to enable the game to return during this pandemic and must submit their dossier today.  Zifa will then forward the document to the Sports and Recreation Commission and health authorities for approval.  The Zambia Super League resumed their 2019-20 season two weeks ago after they had suspended play in March.
However, the Football Association of Zambia had to end the campaign prematurely last week after the Covid-19 cases continued to rise.
Across the Limpopo, the Absa Premiership is set to resume on August 8 with teams using neutral venues to complete the season.  In Europe, most of the leagues were able to resume and conclude their seasons but matches were played behind closed doors with no fans.
Players, officials and all the support staff were regularly tested for Covid-19 before and after all training sessions and matches.  Ndebele said local football should not force the matter and try to replicate what is happening in other countries where resources are more readily available. “There is no need for us to rush because the pandemic is within us. We need to be patient while observing all the protocols,” the PSL boss said.  “In my own opinion, I think the South Africans are just desperate to conclude their season, otherwise it’s not looking good. It’s important that we don’t always copy everything from Europe, it does not work here in Africa. Here, most players wait for the next Zupco to and from training whereas in Europe players choose which car to use so it’s a different scenario. We need to be extremely careful….”  Initially, the 2020 campaign should have commenced in March but had to be postponed indefinitely in a bid to curb the spread of the virus.
Since then clubs have been struggling to stay afloat since most of them rely on gate takings to fund their operations.  Top clubs like CAPS United and Highlanders have had to be bailed out by well wishers, who donated  groceries and food packs to their players.
Zifa has received US$1,8 million which should go towards keeping all sectors of the game sustainable. UNCERTAINTY: Chances are high that premier league action might not return this year as the country is recording high numbers of coronavirus cases.  