 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) has released over US$2,5 million to scale up the country’s provision of gender-based violence (GBV) and sexual reproductive health services during the Covid-19 pandemic. This comes as GBV cases in the country have significantly increased, with advocacy organisation Musasa Project recently revealing that its centres have assisted over 10 849 violence survivors since the beginning of the coronavirus (Covid-19) induced national lockdown. UNFPA deputy country representative Gulnara Kadrykulova said the Covid-19 pandemic had affected the lives of many people and pushed up incidences of GBV. Some of the appropriate interventions which will be supported by the funding include, scaling up the mobile one stop centres model for multi-sectorial service delivery, including health, police and legal support, scaling up the GBV hotline capacity for remote psychosocial support and increasing GBV Covid-19 impact surveillance and referrals through community volunteers and equipment of data and airtime for direct link with hotlines and mobile services. Before the Covid-19 pandemic hit, Zimbabwe’s Health Demographic Survey indicated that more than 35 percent of married women aged 15-49 experience spousal violence committed by their husband or partner while one in three girls is married off before she turns 18, often to older men. “The impact of Covid-19 will likely hamper global efforts to achieve the three zeros at the heart of our work at UNFPA — zero unmet need for contraception, zero preventable maternal deaths, and zero gender-based violence and harmful practices against women and girls — by 2030. UNFPA projects that the pandemic will cut global progress towards ending gender-based violence within this decade by at least one third,” she added. Meanwhile, Unicef Zimbabwe has indicated that it is set to receive 8 000 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test kits through the Health Development Fund (HDF) to increase the country’s testing capacity. “The HDF continues to provide support through Unicef Zimbabwe on the procurement of consumables as well as for critical activities in response to the pandemic. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Expected among lifesaving PPE materials are 8 000 Thermofisher Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test kits which will help increase testing coverage,” Unicef said. “In response to Covid-19, Unicef, the World Health Organisation (WHO), Ministry of Health and Child Care and Population Service International (PSI) have funded the training of 177 environmental health and health promotion officers from 59 districts on integrated Covid-19 Risk Communication and Community Engagement. “Training took place in Kadoma and Harare,” Unicef added.