 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zwTHE government should abandon the use of Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) and revisit its testing strategy in order to improve the country’s response to the lethal coronavirus (Covid-19), senior doctors have said.  In a letter dated August 11 and addressed to the Health and Child Care ministry in possession of the Daily News, the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA) said there was a need for the government to have a renewed conversation on Covid-19 testing as RDTs have been proven to give false negative results.  The country now has close to 5 000 positive cases of coronavirus, including 128 deaths and 1 927 recoveries.   “The WHO and Africa CDC only recommend these tests for use in public health surveillance, not diagnosis of individual patients.  “The high false negative rate may lead to delayed presentation at a health facility, and poorer outcomes consequently,” the senior doctors said.  “We need a national conversation to guide who should be tested. In our view it is a waste of resources to test everyone. Priority should be given to close contacts as described by WHO and those with risk factors and symptomatic individuals.  “Testing at companies must be on clinical grounds. Random testing of an entire workforce on the basis of one positive co-worker without meeting any definition of contact status is clogging the system and for little reward,” the doctors added.  As of August 9, the government had conducted 78 140 RDTs and 71 608 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests.
The SHDA further said given that there had been an accelerated increase in Covid-19 cases since May 28, 2020, with local transmissions accounting for 70 percent of the cases, more attention should be given to case management while continuing with prevention strategies.   “Government and the private sector must come together to streamline procurement. Innovative models such as the Africa Medical Supplies Platform could be exploited.  “We are, therefore, asking for a revisit and amendment to Statutory Instruments 136 and 174 of 2020 and other Statutory Instruments which set out the national testing strategy as a matter of urgency,” the senior doctors said.  The SHDA further called on the government to address the lack of personal protective equipment (PPE) in both private and public hospitals.  The senior doctors, junior doctors and nurses have been on a nationwide strike over the lack of personal protective equipment (PPE) in hospitals and poor remuneration.   “The government should seriously consider, including such institutions (private) for distribution of the donated PPE from National Pharmaceuticals Company (NatPharm). PPE is a huge and often prohibitive cost for these institutions which are struggling in this current economic climate.  “This would assist them to offer a service while remaining viable and partly cushion patients from having the cost passed onto them via exorbitant hospital bills.  “Institutions cannot justify turning away patients in acute asthmatic attack, accident victims or any other medical emergencies because they do not have a PCR result, which takes 24-48 hours to come out,” the senior doctors said.  This comes at a time when the country’s hospitals are turning away patients who fail to produce test results to show that they are Covid-19 negative.  “Some ambulance services have refused to take patients to hospital for fear of Covid-19. Some renowned funeral parlours’ workers are refusing to do body removals while some companies and statutory bodies are now demanding a Covid-19 negative result before one gets permission to enter their premises.  “There is a need for all to remember that the vast majority, 80 to 85 percent, of people who are infected with this virus will recover with no to minimal intervention.”