Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw WARRIORS coach Zdravko “Loga” Logarusic has challenged under-fire Kaizer Chiefs forward Khama Billiat to ignore his critics and concentrate on regaining his form in the South African Absa Premier League. Billiat has so far failed to justify his big-money move from Mamelodi Sundowns to the Phefeni Glamor Boys in June 2018. This season in particular the 30-year-old Zimbabwean forward has come in for some heavy criticism after only netting a single goal. Billiat is the highest-earning player in the Super Diski with a salary close to R1 million a month and this has amplified the scrutiny from the South African media and pundits. With Chiefs seemingly blowing every opportunity they are presented with to open up a healthy lead at the top of the log and secure the 2019-20 title, Billiat has been the fall guy. At the weekend, Billiat’s woes mounted when he was hauled off at halftime by coach Ernst Middendorp as Chiefs rallied from behind to salvage a 1-1 home draw against mid-table side Stellenbosch. The draw left Billiat and his teammates just six points ahead of second-placed Mamelodi Sundowns, who have a game in hand. With Chiefs and Sundowns set to meet in a top of the table clash this Thursday, the stage has now been set for a potential winner-take-all scenario in the Super Diski title race. There is no doubt the build-up to the forthcoming match will be centred on Billiat’s poor form and Chiefs’ struggles.
However, Logarusic has thrown his weight behind the Warriors talisman to rediscover his form before the season ends. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); With the Warriors now set to resume their 2022 Africa Cup of Nations Group H qualifiers with two mouth-watering clashes against reigning champions Algeria in November, Logarusic needs his top man to be at his best. Algeria currently top the group with six points while Zimbabwe are in second place with four points after two games. Botswana are in third place in the group with a single point while Zambia are bottom as they are yet to get off the mark. Logarusic hopes that by November Billiat will be back to his usual best in order to help the Warriors’ cause. “Loss of form is part of the game; it’s part of football. He is a superstar and criticism is not for small boys,” the Croatian said. “Also it’s not easy to play in a foreign land; not everyone will love you, some people will be jealousy of you. So everything rests on Khama to return to top form.” Meanwhile, Chiefs coach Middendorp also threw his weight behind his under-performing superstar in the wake of the criticism. “We know it’s not a great season from Khama, but everyone knows he has huge potential. We can only support him and put him into better movement and expect that he will do better,” the German coach said.
Former Chiefs midfielder Jabulani Mendu recently claimed the Soweto giants had been given a different Billiat when they signed him from Sundowns. “First they need to check if Sundowns gave them the right Khama Billiat, because I don’t think Sundowns gave Kaizer Chiefs the right Khama Billiat,” Mendu said during a recent interview. “Khama doesn’t have that surprise element anymore. That bite, that hunger to be the best on the field for that day. To score goals, to create goals, creativity… it’s no more there. What happened? “Boy, do you need a hug? What do you need? Tell us, maybe we can help. If Khama can pull up his socks, if Khama can play the way we know his capabilities, Chiefs could have won this league a long time ago.”