 Mugove Tafirenyika
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zw PRETORIA said yesterday that it was in close contact with Harare over Zimbabwe’s deepening political and economic crises, adding that South Africa stood ready to assist if requested to do so, the Daily News reports.  At the same time, the regional power’s ruling party — the African National Congress (ANC) — revealed that President Cyril Ramaphosa had been in discussions with President Emmerson Mnangagwa about Zimbabwe’s myriad challenges.   “The minister of International Relations and Co-operation, Dr Naledi Pandor, is in contact with her Zimbabwean counterpart, the minister of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, Mr Sibusiso Moyo.  “As recent as on Tuesday, the two ministers had a telephonic conversation, wherein minister Pandor expressed South Africa’s readiness to assist if requested.  “Minister Pandor, reiterated South Africa’s commitment to peace and stability in the region and the African continent,” South Africa’s International Relations (Foreign Affairs) ministry said yesterday.“She stated that it remains South Africa’s resolve to continue the pursuit for consultative solutions to address the existing socio-economic challenges and to contribute to the well-being of all Zimbabweans, the people of the Sadc Region and Africans at large,” it added.   In addition to revealing that Ramaphosa was conferring with Mnangagwa about Zimbabwe’s crises, the ANC also said that it was going to hold a special session on how best to assist SA’s troubled northern neighbour. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Speaking on television channel eNCA, the ANC’s secretary-general Ace Magashule criticised alleged breaches of human rights in Zimbabwe by the government.     “So, we will assist the Zimbabweans to stabilise their country, their economy. We have a role to play as South Africa, as the African Union and as the African National Congress party,” he said.  Magashule also said the ANC had met some Zimbabweans who were exiled in South Africa as part of its efforts to have a deeper understanding of the alleged human rights violations in the country.  “We have talked to some people who have run away and are exiled. We know their story and that is why we are interacting party to party to raise some of the concerns they actually raised about what is happening in Zimbabwe.
“Of course, they raised the fact that they are being brutally treated and we are interacting with our counterparts.
“We said black lives matter, the lives of human beings matter. So, Zimbabwean lives matter of course. What we see on television is really uncalled for,” Magashule said.  The moves by both the South African government and the country’s ruling party to speak on Zimbabwe’s worsening crises come in the wake of growing pressure on Ramaphosa and his administration to intervene in Harare’s travails.  It also comes as South Africa and its leaders — including former presidents Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma — have in the past successfully mediated Zimbabwe’s political crises.  A decade ago, both Mbeki and Zuma helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between  opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and former president Robert Mugabe — who are both late — following the hotly disputed 2008 presidential election.  Zuma also assisted in minimising Zimbabwe’s chaotic approach to the equally disputed 2013 national elections.
All this comes as Mnangagwa and his government have been accused of launching a brutal crackdown against the organisers of last week’s flopped mass protests.  Rights groups have said dozens of opposition figures and activists have been either brutally tortured or severely assaulted in a retributive exercise by suspected security agents.  On its part, the government has refuted the allegations — claiming instead that the opposition is allegedly working with foreigners to destabilise the country.   “My administration remains committed to enhancing co-operation with friends and partners in the international community, as we entrench democracy and the rule of law within our jurisdiction.  “In this regard, we will continue to strive to achieve the delicate balance between the maintenance of peace and security, and on the other hand protecting civil liberties and individual rights.  “In all circumstances, public officials and security services will carry out their duties with appropriate astuteness and resolve.  “The protection of the right to life is paramount, especially in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and machinations by destructive terrorist opposition groupings,” Mnangagwa said.  “Let us, therefore, pledge individually and collectively, to defend our country, to be productive, to grow our economy and never to tear our motherland apart by dividing its people.  “In unison we must proclaim that enough is enough. This is Zimbabwe, our motherland, and we will defend her from any form of attack. “As your president, I vow to continue working harder and walking the talk towards the vision we have set out.
“Let us together cultivate a society of hope and not despair, of inspiration instead of desperation, unity in place of disunity, love in place of hate and peace instead of disharmony and instability,” Mnangagwa said further.  All this also comes as Zimbabwe is in the grip of a huge economic crisis — while political tensions remain high following last week’s attempts by the opposition and pro-democracy groups to hold anti-government protests.  The planned mass demonstrations failed to take off after authorities made heavy deployments of security forces around the country.  And security forces have maintained a heavy presence around the country, amid talk of more protests by the opposition and pro-democracy groups.  This also comes as Zimbabwe is currently under a rigid lockdown, which includes a dusk-to-dawn curfew, imposed by authorities in a bid to combat the spread of the lethal coronavirus in the country. 