FRIENDS, family and fellow coaches came out in their thousands to bid farewell to Prince “Pipi” Kadewere, who was buried here yesterday.  Prince, 40, an elder brother to Warriors and Lyon forward Tino, passed away in the capital last week Wednesday morning after a short illness.  Although large gatherings are still banned due to the government regulations put in place to combat the spread of coronavirus (Covid-19), the Kadewere homestead was swarmed by hordes of people in a testament of the many lives Prince had touched during his time on this earth.  After growing up in Highfield as an exciting young football prospect, Prince’s promising career was cut short by injuries.  Although he never scaled dizzy heights in his playing career, he had done enough to be regarded a legend in Highfield and its surrounding areas.  Influenced by his late father Onias, who was a football grassroots stalwart at Zimbabwe Grounds, Prince had developed into a bright upcoming coach. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  There was no doubt that he was destined to reach the top flight as evidenced with his work at Beta XI in the Zifa Northern Region Division One during the 2018 season.  Prince almost led Beta XI into the Promised Land only to falter at the final hurdle as they were pipped to promotion by Mushowani Stars.  Former CAPS United and Dynamos midfielder Ashley Rambanepasi was in tears as he spoke glowingly of his long-time friend.   “We played football together at school and also at Rufaro Rovers. He would come pick me up to go to training until one day when he told his coach to put me in the team. It’s hard to believe he is gone.”
Former CAPS United and Black Aces defender David Sengu was equally lost for words as he described Prince.  “I started playing with Pipi I think from Under-10 and those days there were council teams from Under-10 to Under 18,” Sengu reminisced.  “We went on to play together at Rufaro Rovers. We only separated when I went to Black Aces with him joining Zim Crackers. When he played for Monoz I was now at CAPS. He was more like a brother. We would spend a lot of time together. It’s a huge loss.  “He had developed into a good coach and at one point we met in the dugout when I was at Banket United and he was now at Beta XI. And until now I can’t believe he is gone.”  Zimbabwe Soccer Coaches Association (Zisca) chairperson Bheki Nyoni reckoned the country had lost a young upcoming coach who was destined for greatness.  “His father was my Harare Province chairperson for a long time. I take them (Kadeweres) like my sons, it’s a great loss,” Nyoni said.  “Pipi had shown he was a young and upcoming coach. He was one of the coaches who played a huge role in the development of Tino and has just taken division one by storm.”  Zifa Northern Region Area Zone chairperson Moses Chikoti said: “He was a good young man and was very passionate about junior development.  “We lost him just when he was showing signs to excel. They had revived their father’s project and it’s sad.” Zimdancehall star Shinsoman, who was friends with Prince, was also in attendance here.  “It’s a huge loss. He was a friend and a brother to me.
“He was more like a brother to me. We grew up together; he is one of the guys we looked up to when growing up.”