 Jeffrey Muvundusi
in BULAWAYOTHE government will open more information centres in rural areas as it endeavours to boost access to reliable information on the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.  This comes at a time when there has been a lot of misinformation around the pandemic, which has claimed almost 130 lives and infected close to 5 000 people in the country.  Speaking at the official opening of a community information centre in Maphisa, Matabeleland South province yesterday, Information Communication Technology (ICT) minister Jenfan Muswere said Covid-19 misinformation was the ‘‘greatest security threat of our time’’.   “By visiting information centres, members of the public can access reliable information on Covid-19 published by the World Health Organisation and our own ministry of Health and Child Care.  “My ministry will, therefore, spare no effort in operationalising as many information centres as we can during this pandemic…we will ensure that more Zimbabweans are kept informed of the pandemic and have access to other ICTs services.”  The Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (Potraz) has in the past few years been on a drive to have connectivity in the country’s rural and marginalised communities. This saw them erecting base stations while also launching information centres as part of the broader campaign to improve access to ICT services.  The move has also enabled government to bridge the digital divide among citizens particularly during this lockdown period where government is pushing for e-learning.  The Maphisa community information centre is furnished with modern computers that are connected to the Internet.  To date, Potraz has operationalised 114 community information centres and 24 Containerised Village Information Centres in different parts of the country.  Speaking at the same event, Potraz director-general Gift Machengete said the statutory body is seized with ensuring that marginalised areas have access to ICTs to bridge the digital divide. “By way of background, in support of the government policy to provide access to ICT and postal services to all the people of Zimbabwe, Potraz came up with the concept of community information centres, which are housed at post offices throughout the country,” Machengete said.  “In places where there are no post offices, or where the post offices are too small to accommodate a CIC, the authority deployed Containerised Village Information Centres.” 