 FORMER Warriors captain Willard Katsande has been trending on social media due to his fashion sense. The Kaizer Chiefs midfield enforcer regularly posts pictures in trendy outfits that have mostly generated positive comments but there are some naysayers that feel it is a little bit over the top. Q: How have you been coping with the coronavirus-induced break?
A: It was good for me because I was coming from an injury and it gave me enough time to recover and get treatment for my leg. I used the free time to get proper treatment and I also tried to think outside the box to see how I could improve my life and see where I want to be in the next three to four years.   I also used my free time to be with the kids; the family is never used to having me around during the season so we had enough time together. Q: You recently returned to training under strict health protocols; is there any difference to the way you used to train in the past?
A: Of course we are back in training and it’s a bit different but this is the new normal. I always say that professional players must adapt to any new situations and the good thing is that we are back in training and that’s the most important thing. We are working on our fitness because running without the ball and running with the ball are two different things. Right now we are just trying to get familiar and reacquainted with the ball. Q: Chiefs are currently on top of the log; what do you need to do as a team in order to fend off the challenge posed by your nearest challengers Mamelodi Sundowns?
A: Before the season started, our agreement as players and the coaches was for us to win the league and we have worked very hard to be where we are. It was not a fluke because we were consistent and we knew what we wanted to achieve.
We just need to continue what we were doing and we will win the league; we have already had a fantastic season thus far and winning the title is our objective. Everything is still in our control and we need to focus on our matches and not worry what other teams are doing. Q: At the start of the year, you signed a contract extension with Chiefs for another 12 months, how will the delay caused by the coronavirus impact your contract?
A: I signed a contract extension of 12 months plus the remaining 12 months so basically it was a two-year extension. Nothing is going to be changed because we are professionals and we are going to go into the next season very soon. My relationship with Chiefs has been very good and it was the easiest decision for me to renew and God willingly, I’m going to retire here.    Q: Next January you will be turning 35, how do you see your playing career progressing?
A: I’m proud for myself because I know that at that age I will remain as competitive as I am today. I will be progressing as a player and as a leader. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); My playing career has been fantastic and I’m trying to enjoy every second and every minute because when I’m older, I will look back and say ‘I enjoyed my career and I achieved everything I could.’ I’m grateful for the what I have achieved and enjoy what I’m doing now because one day I will miss the game. Q: Obviously you must be thinking of your post-playing career, which direction do you think you will take?
A: I’m thinking a lot about my post-playing career because obviously my legs won’t carry me forever. There are a couple of things I’m working on and obviously I’m going to be into fashion; I’m going to be a model and I’m also doing my coaching badges. Q: Away from the playing field; you have been mocked on social media due to your dress sense, does it bother you?
A: I’m one person who knows how to dress and I’m confident of myself. I know how to dress and nobody can tell me anything. I keep up with trends and this is no arrogance but I know I’m the best.   I’m now getting a lot of positive messages with people wanting me to advertise their clothing so I cannot consider it as mockery.
I’m enjoying what I’m doing and I’m a strong person who will not allow the negative energy to stop me from doing what I love. It does not bother me in any way because if you actually look at the statistics, my Twitter and Instagram following is growing every day; I’m getting 1 000 plus new followers a day. This shows there are people that follow and love my dress sense and fashion.