Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw AMID the escalating dysfunction within the public health sector, Vice President Constantino Chiwenga — the country’s new Health minister — has come up with a new restructuring strategy aimed at reviving the system, the Daily News reports. Among his top priorities, it has emerged, is to ensure that striking doctors and nurses resume work as soon as possible, after weeks of their industrial action over poor pay and work conditions. This comes as health workers, including doctors and nurses, said earlier this week that they were disappointed that Chiwenga and his permanent secretary Jasper Chimedza had not yet met them to address their plight. Speaking during a post-Cabinet media briefing on Tuesday, Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa said Chiwenga had presented a restructuring exercise strategy which would see the country’s health system being anchored on four pillars that include the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals, ventilators, hospital beds and other essential equipment. Yesterday, the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA) told the Daily News that the government needed to come up with a robust plan to deal with all the challenges bedevilling the health sector. “Right now we have nurses who are earning an equivalent of US$20 to US$30 per month and you cannot expect those people to return to work. “They have families to take care of in addition to travel costs so they cannot afford to come to work,” Musara further told the Daily News. “Another challenge is that of medical drugs. We have no drugs in our hospitals and other consumables to use when treating patients. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Focusing on biopharmaceuticals product manufacturing will take us 10 to 15 years to address the lack of drugs and consumables in our hospitals,” he added. “In terms of equipment, most of it is broken down and needs fixing or complete replacement.
“Biomedical engineering will not immediately solve these challenges, but what we need is for someone to fix the broken down machines and for the government to mobilise resources to purchase new, modern and effective equipment. “In the long term, the government can then prioritise developing the local manufacture of drugs and medical equipment to ease the import bill,” Musara also told the Daily News. He also said authorities were still to meet with the doctors who have been on strike for more than a month.
“Since the new appointments were made, no one has made the effort to meet with us and find ways of dealing with our challenges,” Musara said.