By Blessings Mashaya and Mugove Tafirenyika  MDC Alliance deputy national chairperson and spokesperson of the July 31 Movement, Job “Wiwa” Sikhala, pictured, was arrested by authorities in Tynwald North — west of Harare — yesterday, having spent nearly a month in hiding, the Daily News reports.  At the same time, another organiser of the foiled mass protests that were planned last month, Jacob Ngarivhume, was denied bail at the Harare Magistrates’ Court yesterday — for the third time. This comes as the political climate in the country has remained tense following accusations of gross human rights violations levelled against the government, after authorities thwarted the planned July 31 mass protests. Police confirmed last night that they had arrested Sikhala, who was found in a western suburb of the capital city.
“I can confirm that Sikhala was arrested. He was hiding in Tynwald North,” police spokesperson Paul Nyathi told the Daily News. The MDC Alliance also confirmed Sikhala’s arrest, saying he was being victimised for fighting for the truth — in apparent reference to his calls for mass action against the government. “We can confirm that our deputy national chairperson Job Sikhala has been arrested this afternoon in Harare.
“Lawyers led by Harrison Nkomo are at Harare Central Police Station now to attend to the case. “The whole party is solidly behind him. He is being victimised for saying the truth,” MDC Alliance deputy spokesperson, Clifford Hlatywayo, said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “This cowardly, illegitimate regime does not want to hear any voice of dissent. Sikhala and the MDC Alliance represent the ordinary citizens who are excluded and neglected by the elite in government.
“We condemn this arrest. It’s political and we demand justice for Sikhala,” he added. Legal experts said Sikhala was likely to be charged with inciting public violence — the same allegations levelled against the July 31 demo convener, Ngarivhume, who was denied bail for the third time yesterday. Sikhala had been in hiding since suspected State agents began trailing him in the run-up to the foiled July 31 mass demonstrations. In the last few weeks, the lawyer-cum-politician had rallied Zimbabweans to crank up the heat on authorities, after the government successfully stopped the planned demonstrations. “I accepted the role to be with others in the quest for a corruption-free and looting-free society when people sharing the same vision with me invited me. “When I accept that I will stand with you, I don’t betray you later. I promised my colleagues … who are also under siege like me that we shall stand together with the people of Zimbabwe and I don’t betray what I promised.
“The demonstrations were basically citizen-driven and I agreed to be one of their spokespersons. I could have been at my law chambers making money, but people’s interests supersede my personal interests,” Sikhala told the Daily News last week. The fearless Zengeza West legislator was also arrested in October last year on charges of subverting a constitutionally-elected government, after he told his party’s rally in Bikita East that he would work to overthrow Mnangagwa’s administration before the next elections due in 2023. Sikhala’s trial and subsequent acquittal were marred by ugly violence which rocked the usually-laid back Masvingo town — after riot police fought running battles with MDC supporters who had swamped the court in solidarity with the tough-talking politician. His latest arrest comes at a time that South Africa President Cyril Ramaphosa is trying to end Zimbabwe’s long-running political crisis, which has once again attracted international attention. This comes after the government was accused of gross human rights violations, following the State’s heavy deployment of police and soldiers ahead of the foiled July 31 mass protests. Rights groups have claimed that dozens of opposition figures and activists have been tortured and assaulted in a retributive exercise by suspected security agents. Tensions were further stoked last week when Catholic bishops in Zimbabwe released a stinging letter in which they accused the government of carrying out human rights abuses and instilling fear among the populace.
The bishops said the country was suffering from “a multi-layered crisis” — including economic collapse, deepening poverty, corruption and human rights abuses. “Fear runs down the spine of many of our people today. The crackdown on dissent is unprecedented. Is this the Zimbabwe we want? To have a different opinion does not mean to be an enemy,” the bishops said. As a result of Zimbabwe’s escalating woes, Ramaphosa has appointed special envoys — former South Africa vice president Baleka Mbete and ex-ministers Sydney Mufamadi and Ngoako Ramatlhodi — to try and end the decades-long local crises.  