 STANBIC Bank has stepped up functionality of Foreign Currency Accounts (FCAs) on their digital banking platforms, to enable its customers to take full advantage of the interbank rates being implemented through the introduction of the forex auction system. Following the Reserve Bank’s pronouncement which allows the use of foreign currency for local transactions, the bank took the opportunity to enhance digital banking offerings that allow account holders to facilitate transactions using their free funds with ease. Patson Mahatchi, Stanbic’s head of personal and business banking indicated that the institution anticipates market appreciation of the new auction system as it provides a market regulated approach to determining exchange rates, which will encourage account holders to use their free funds through digital banking platforms at the governed official exchange rate. The bank’s digital banking platforms for both personal and business customers, allow for transfers to be made from FCAs to ZWL accounts and payment of bills, all such transactions being processed using the prevailing official rate. Customers can also perform local US$ transactions through interbank or internal transactions, as well as process US$ bills such as DStv subscriptions. Civil servants have also become beneficiaries of the payments system as they can now access their recently opened local US$ accounts on the bank’s mobile and online banking platforms. Mahatchi emphasized the Bank’s determination towards continuous innovation around customer needs cognizant of prevailing dynamics. In that regard, the bank recently launched the Slydepay App which is geared to revolutionise local payment options with the QR code payment option which eliminates contact. The technologically advanced application allows account holders to pay bills and make in-store purchases on their phone using QR code scanning technology. Stanbic Bank views the digitalisation drive as a futuristic move necessitated by technological advancements that have taken over the sector worldwide. The bank is adopting a model adopted by many financial and non-financial institutions in other parts of the world but very few in southern Africa. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); These new banking technologies bring ease of banking to Stanbic’s customers thus helping the institution move to the next level of banking.