 Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw FORMER Warriors coach Sunday “Mhofu” Chidzambwa’s pitch walk to raise funds to combat coronavirus (Covid-19) will now go ahead this Friday after organisers got government’s approval. This comes as the country has experienced a sharp rise in positive cases with 104 people having lost their lives from the 4 748 confirmed cases. The former Warriors coach will walk 50 times the length of a football pitch at the venue in a bid to raise funds for frontline health workers who are helping the country combat the novel virus which has brought the entire world to a standstill. Initially, Chidzambwa should have conducted the charity event at Raylton Sports Club in Harare two months ago but the organisers had to postpone after the government raised a red flag. The event’s organising secretary Martin Changachirere told the Daily News that all is now in place for the charity walk to go ahead after they assured the government that all the necessary health guidelines will be observed. Chidzambwa called on those fortunate enough to come on board and donate to this noble cause. The Mhofu Covid-19 Walk has also been spiced up after football legends George Shaya and David Mandigora have also come on board to participate. What makes Shaya, who won the Soccer Star of the Year Award a record five times, and Mandigora’s inclusion unique is the fact that these two legends unfortunately each had a leg amputated due to various health ailments. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Chidzambwa, Shaya and Mandigora hope their charity walk will generate the same impact as that of former British serviceman Tom Moore which became a rallying point for the entire United Kingdom at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic. The 100-year-old raised a staggering £32 million for National Health Service (NHS) staff after reaching his goal of walking 100 laps of his garden. When Moore started his fundraising walk in April, he had hoped to raise £1 000 but after raising £70 000 in 24 hours, he extended his target to £1 million. Following a number of TV interviews after he reached the £1 million mark, more people became aware of Moore’s efforts resulting in additional support from all across the UK and beyond. In May, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson made a special nomination for the war veteran to be knighted and last month Queen Elizabeth obliged to the request. The Queen personally praised Moore during the knighting ceremony held at Windsor Castle.