 ZANU PF yesterday came out guns blazing, blasting the United States of America (USA) for imposing sanctions on businessman Kuda Tagwirei and his company Sakunda Holdings.  This comes after USA President Donald Trump’s administration on August 5 slammed sanctions on Tagwirei and his firm, claiming he used his closeness to President Emmerson Mnangagwa to enrich himself.  In a statement, the ruling party said the USA did not provide evidence on why they imposed the embargoes on the tycoon. “Until evidence to the contrary is established, Zanu PF wishes to place it on record that it considers Tagwirei and Sakunda Holdings a respected player and stakeholder in the economy of Zimbabwe just as we are sure General Electric is considered a respected economic player in the USA and globally.  “Under our policy of indigenisation and economic empowerment of previously disadvantaged under colonialism, Zanu PF’s expectations are that the country will be able to nurture many more Tagwireis and fellow indigenous entrepreneurs to be successful world-class businesses that will make impactful contribution to the reconstruction of our economy and the attainment of President Mnangagwa’s 2030 vision to make Zimbabwe an Upper Middle-Income country,” Zanu PF said.   “Zanu PF is indeed perplexed that one of the basis for imposing the OFAC sanctions on the entities is the Dema Diesel Power Project which was undertaken and intended by government to address in the shortest possible time, intermittent power shortages wreaking havoc in our economy and thereby disrupting production across all sectors in the economy.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “On the issue of Command Agriculture again, the USA has conveniently chosen to act on the basis of falsehoods such as the allegations that Tagwirei and Sakunda Holdings defrauded government under the very successful Command Agriculture scheme initiated and then funded by government to ensure the success of the land reform programme.  ‘‘The scheme was successful and boosted agricultural output.”  Zanu PF said the USA government was sponsoring non-governmental organisations to spread lies about the situation in Zimbabwe.   “For the record, none of these 4 000 NGOs are in the business of sinking boreholes and building clinics, hospitals or schools to meet the basic necessities of our people, but peddling the regime change agenda in the majority of them.”  According to Trump’s administration, Tagwirei had a longstanding association with the ruling Zanu PF and high-level government officials — including Mnangagwa and Vice President Constantino Chiwenga, who were slapped with sanctions in March 2003 and November 2005 respectively.  Tagwirei sits in the Presidential Advisory Council (PAC) and his company, Sakunda, has been heavily involved in the Command Agriculture programme, which was introduced by the late former President Robert Mugabe in 2016 to provide food security to the country.  Although Sakunda Holdings was accused of having received US$3 billion for the programme, it said in Parliament — during a hearing this year — that   the figure had been overstated as it had only received US$1 billion between June 2016 and May 2019. 