Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw RESERVE Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) governor John Mangudya says the raft of recent measures unveiled by authorities will continue to stabilise the economy and also gradually result in the prices of basic goods going down, the Daily News reports.  This comes as the Zimbabwe dollar has lately been holding steady against major global currencies, following the government’s recent launch of the foreign currency auction system — thereby stabilising prices.  Addressing a virtual meeting of chief executive officers (CEOs) yesterday, Mangudya said Zimbabweans can look forward to a more stable local economy going forward.   “The auction system is being sustained through domestic resource mobilisation, wherein we say 20 percent of commercial transactions are directed to go to the auction system.  “This ensures that foreign currency keeps on flowing and businesses are sustained … The exchange rate is gradually stabilising. All bids have been between $80 and $88 for the past three to four weeks.  “The average is vacillating within that ruler … and this is not far from the parallel market rate which is around $82 for cash and $90 for transfers,” Mangudya said.  This comes as prices of goods and services have been stabilising in shops, after a bout of steep earlier increases which were fuelled by the collapse of the Zimbabwe dollar against the US dollar.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Since the launch of the auction system in June, the Zimbabwe dollar has moved from 63 to the US dollar, to the current 83,39 against the coveted greenback.   “We are providing infrastructure and the rules are there to ensure that the process is transparent and accountable.  “We are re-strategising and putting an end to a random walk. We are trying to abandon the random course and walk towards stabilising the exchange rate in order for prices to stabilise,” Mangudya said further.  Last month, Mangudya said prices would come down in due course on the back of a raft of measures that the authorities were introducing to stablise the economy.  “We do believe as a bank (RBZ) that we have reached a plateau in terms of price instability and in terms of exchange rate instability and, therefore, what the budget does, is to further reinforce those positions.  “The combination of a tight fiscal regime, together with a tight money supply and … the auction system of foreign currency, have seen these … measures being pursued by the government to ensure that the country does not go through a process of hyper-inflation.  “We are happy with where we are. We think we are on course to achieve price stability. We are also on course to achieve foreign currency exchange rate stability.  “The … market rate of exchange measured by the auction is now narrow, which is what we always expected as we said last time we cannot eliminate the parallel market, but it is about the gap that is between the two,” Mangudya told a virtual meeting at the time that was organised by the Daily News.  