 RICKY Johnstone, pictured, is proud to be one of the proponents of the sport of show jumping which has a rich history in Zimbabwe. The sport involves a rider and his horse navigating through a number of diverse obstacles which they must clear in an allotted time. The country has hosted the prestigious equestrian event — the Llewellyn Cup — since the 1960s and Johnstone has been part of the cast both as a rider and coach. In Algeria, Clark went up against riders from South Africa, Zambia, Mauritius and Egypt before achieving the podium finish. The other members of the team are Nicole Gibbs, Tegan Russel and Nicholas Nicol. The 27-year-old is currently based at the High Performance Equestrian Centre at Borrowdale Country Club where a number of show jumping events run from February to November yearly. However, just like all sporting events in the country and across the world, show jumping has also been greatly affected by the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. The sport resumed competitions two weeks ago after going into hibernation in March when the government declared a full lockdown to try and curb the spread of Covid-19. The biggest challenge the sport has faced during this pandemic is the care of the animals since horses need a lot of attention 24/7. “As with any industry, Covid-19 has had huge implications; with horse sport and the equestrian industry, we have the added complication of care for the equine athletes (horses) as well as the other implications,” Johnstone said.
“Unlike other sports, we cannot simply pack the horses in a cupboard as you would do with a set of golf clubs or tennis rackets.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “On a personal front, I must say that I owe a huge debt of gratitude to my employees who worked double shifts and huge overtime during the lockdown period. “I don’t live on site but ended up making a home for myself in my office during lockdown. The horses are the real stars of our sport and it is vital that we treat them with utmost care and attention.” Once the Covid-19 pandemic subsides, Johnstone hopes the sport can continue to since there are a lot of employment opportunities. “These range from the more obvious (rider, coach, groom) to the less obvious (physiotherapists, nutritionists, osteopaths, vets) which all add up to make the industry fairly far reaching,” he said.