THE United States of America (US) is rallying the Southern African Development Community (Sadc) to play a more assertive role in helping to solve the deepening crisis in Zimbabwe. The US is also urging President Emmerson Mnangagwa to open dialogue with the opposition. Speaking for the first time since the ruling Zanu PF called him a “thug”, US Ambassador to Harare Brian A Nichols , pictured, said South Africa was leading by example and could achieve success in bringing about change in the neighbouring country. “This is an opportunity for the institution (Sadc) to stand up to the excesses that are taking place here in terms of human rights abuses. And this is an opportunity for Sadc to promote a more prosperous region,” he said. Nichols said Zimbabwe had a three-pronged crisis: health care, food security and political turmoil. “There’s widespread concern about where Zimbabwe is headed and people who are legitimate friends of Zimbabwe are deeply worried,” he said. He said since 2018, after the disputed general elections that handed a narrow win to Mnangagwa, there had been high-level meetings between him and American officials — but what was discussed had not been implemented by Harare. The ambassador said some of the concerns are “shared mutually” with some senior officials in government who believe the country’s future depends on enacting broad reforms around freedom of expression, rule of law, strong institutions, anti-corruption, and levelling the political playing field. Nichols is not alone in calling for dialogue between Mnangagwa and MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa. The church and the international community have called for inclusive talks to end problems in the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Nichols said he believed this could work if all stakeholders acted in good faith. “That is something that we have supported for the last couple of years. Several civic society organisations are advocating for that solution. How that dialogue progresses and what agreements come out of it, will depend on the people of Zimbabwe. Despite Harare denying there’s a crisis in the country, there has been an increased onslaught on opposition political activists. — TimesLive