 KEEPING Zimbabwe in the international business news spotlight is an important broadcast role, and it is one that Rebecca Muchenje, pictured, finds stimulating and enjoyable. As the Zimbabwean correspondent for the BBC’s specialised programme In Business Africa, Muchenje seeks out stories about a range of business and financial matters that are seen and analysed by viewers across the world. Zimbabweans can follow her reports on BBC World, one of the prime news channels platforms on DStv, as well as on BBC World Service radio, which is featured on DStv’s popular audio platform. Muchenje is also a local radio personality, hosting ZiFM’s Get Lifted sessions from 6am to 10pm on Sundays.  Now a seasoned broadcaster, she was a long way from this career path in the years before taking up this role, having been a qualified somatologist and skin care therapist for 15 years. Then opportunity knocked and she fell in love with the whole idea of radio and television, an area she is thrilled to be involved in.
Her BBC show allows her to connect Zimbabwe to a world audience and to hear some positive things about the country, in contrast to the often-dominant negative scenario. “I get to tell the Zimbabwean story, and as a lot is happening in Zimbabwe in terms of business news I feel the world needs to know we are capable of doing business and doing it well,” she said. Muchenje values the role DStv plays in giving Zimbabweans a chance to know more about Zimbabwe, Africa and the world. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); She’s a fan of a number of channels and programmes on DStv, including the various Real Housewives shows, programmes on TLC and on the Discovery Channel. As a ZiFM presenter, Muchenje is also selected to MC for events hosted by the station and by some of its clients, which gives her further opportunities for personal and public interaction “I hope I can help other potential broadcasters to get onto the radio and TV scene and help them achieve their own success in this fascinating field. It’s rewarding in so many ways, not the least of which is giving a great many Zimbabweans a chance to tell their stories to their country and the world. God did it for me and I’m most grateful”  — Own Correspondent