 Nigel Matongorere
SPORTS EDITOR
matongoreren@dailynews.co.zwWARRIORS and Lyon striker Tino Kadewere will be able to attend his elder brother Prince’s burial in Zvimba today after health authorities allowed him to leave quarantine following his arrival from France yesterday.  Prince, 40, passed away in the capital on Wednesday morning and will be buried at the Kadewere rural home today.
However, Tino was on the verge of missing the burial after the Warriors international together with his wife and two young children arrived in Harare on Thursday evening and were taken straight into quarantine at a local hotel.  All visitors coming to Zimbabwe have to go through an eight-day self-isolation at a quarantine centre as authorities battle the spread of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.  Tino and his family were supposed to spend the next eight days at the facility before they were allowed to leave and this would have meant they would have missed today’s burial.  For the better part of yesterday, Tino’s elder brother Prosper was running around in order to secure his release.
Tino, his wife and children were tested in the morning for the novel virus and their negative results were finally released just after 5pm last night.  Despite the doctors giving the Warriors star the green light, there was a further delay as health authorities manning the quarantine centre were yet to receive the exemption letter from the government officials.  The exemption letter was finally delivered around  6:30pm and that is when Tino and his family were finally allowed to leave the quarantine centre.   At the time of Prince’s death, Tino was currently in Lisbon, Portugal where his Ligue 1 side was preparing for tonight’s European Champions League quarter-final against Manchester City.  The Warriors forward is not eligible for the competition since he made his move to Lyon from Ligue 2 side Le Havre after the deadline for registration.  Lyon had hoped Uefa would allow them to field Tino but their request was rebuffed by authorities.
Tino had a strong bond with his late brother, who was also a talented striker growing up in Highfield.  Popularly known as Pipi in football circles, Prince’s career was curtailed by a number of injuries which saw him only feature for lower division teams like Monomotapa United and Air Zimbabwe Jets.  After hanging up his boots at a relatively young age, Prince ventured into coaching and rightly proclaimed that his younger brother was a far much better player than he was.  “Of course I was a good player but I’m not anywhere near my younger brother; Tino will reach far greater heights than I did,” Prince told this reporter during a conversation when Tino was begining to make waves at Harare City in 2014.  At the time of his death, Prince was making a name for himself in coaching circles and was destined to surpass his playing career.  During the 2018 Zifa Northern Region Division One season, he was on the verge of leading Beta XI  to the Premier Soccer League (PSL).  For most part of the campaign, Beta were top of the log and looked favourites to land the sole ticket to the top flight League.  However, form deserted Beta in the final third of the campaign and they eventually missed out on promotion to Mushowani Stars.  Prince had firmly established himself as an upcoming coach during his Beta reign which ended during last season after the side failed to replicate their 2018 form.  The young coach was now in charge of the Kadewere Foundation Academy which was a brainchild of the brothers’ late father Onias, who passed away five years ago. 