 Blessing Masakadza
STAFF WRITER
masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWE Republic Police deputy commissioner-general Stephen Mutamba and head of Criminal Investigation Department, commissioner Chrispen Charumbira, have been accused of interfering in operations of a mine in Mashava, Masvingo. Two Flags Trading owners, one of the mines in the dispute, recently wrote to commissioner- general Godwin Matanga raising a complaint against the two whom they alleged have been sending cops to harass them and interfere with operations at their mine. This comes after the two cops were also recently implicated in allegations of frustrating investigations into alleged fraudulent land deals by Felix Munyaradzi, who is currently languishing in remand custody. In the letter by Two Flags Trading through their lawyer Foroma Chakabuda, they said the police actions were in contravention of a Supreme Court order which put to rest the wrangle between Two Flags Trading and Tambanashe Enterprises. Chakabuda told the Daily News that the police responded to their complaint, but were silent on allegations they had raised. In the letter of complaint to Matanga, the miners alleged there were “corrupt and incorrigible elements that need to be weeded out” in the police force. They said the names Mutamba and Charumbira featured prominently in the dispute which raised their eyebrows. “The common thread that runs in the deployments of these police officers is that all of them were intent on restoring Edgar Mashindi, who had been evicted together with all those who claimed ownership through him in circumstances where the courts of law had dealt with the matter between Tambanashe Enterprises and Two Flags. “They all claimed to have been deployed by commissioner Charumbira at the behest of deputy commissioner-general Mutamba who is responsible for the crime portfolio,” the letter read. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The lawyers said it was surprising that police officers have an interest in a civil dispute.