 IN a surprise move, President Emmerson Mnangagwa yesterday appointed Vice President Constantino Chiwenga as the substantive minister of Health to replace Obadiah Moyo who was fired recently after his arrest on allegations of corruption.
In a statement by Chief Secretary to the President and Cabinet Misheck Sibanda, Chiwenga’s appointment was with immediate effect. “In terms of Section 99 of the Constitution of Zimbabwe (No.20) Act 2013, His Excellency the President … Mnangagwa, has appointed Hon … Chiwenga as minister of Health and Child Care. “In making this decision, His Excellency the President has noted the urgent need to stabilise, restructure and reform the national health system to better cope with challenges of the global Covid-19 pandemic, and in the process, ensuring a quick turnaround in national healthcare. The appointment is with immediate effect.” Chiwenga and Chimedza’s appointments came as senior doctors working in public hospitals last Friday downed tools over the government’s failure to address their grievances, including poor remuneration and lack of personal protective equipment in the wake of a spike in cases of the lethal coronavirus. Nurses are also on strike, while junior doctors have given notice to join the industrial action. The duo is expected to come up with a robust strategy to curb and mitigate the spread of the pandemic and find a solution to the perennial doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers’ strike. Ironically in 2018, Chiwenga fired 16 000 nurses after they went on strike. Mnangagwa at the burial of national hero, Agriculture minister Perrance Shiri, last Friday pleaded with health workers to go back to work for the nation to be able to fight Covid-19. “We must stop the scourge of Covid-19, a global pandemic. It spares no one, great or small. All nations of the world are suffering from its impact, with figures of deaths and infections daily rising. In unity and through discipline we stand a chance to save our nation from the impact of its menace. “I, therefore, urge all of us to continue to act with care to prevent the spread of the deadly pandemic. Let us stay at home wearing masks in public and practise social distancing and good hygiene,” Mnangagwa said.
Moyo was fired after being arrested for alleged graft involving Covid-19 material procurement.