OPINION BLACK EDWARD DURING the first weeks of the lethal coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak the press went into a frenzy, raising false hopes for an early vaccine. We were bombarded daily in the media by detailed news items of promising trial results.
In the comfort of our homes we felt certain that the coronavirus’ days were numbered as invited health experts discussed, in their intricate terminology, the possibility of an early vaccine on television. Images of white-coated scientists wearing branded face shields and masks in spick-and-span laboratories, transfixed by their work, were reassuring and our confidence increased. And looking at those large monitors in the labs simulating floating viruses being eradicated by vaccines, we couldn’t help being optimistic. And it’s dawning on us that we may not have a vaccine soon, as we had hoped, and that we have to adapt — doing all we can to learn to live with the virus while we try to mitigate its spread in the wake of increasing deaths. We must tackle, head-on, this Covid-19, which is continuing to alter the face of normalcy in unprecedented ways as it wreaks havoc.
Let’s not procrastinate — we just have to move on. Our leadership must consult widely and come up with Plan B. There should be some progress in our lives. Even if a vaccine is found “yesterday” we have to realise that it won’t make the disease disappear in Zimbabwe tonight. It certainly will not make life return to normal here immediately. Obviously, the vaccine will take quite some time to reach Africa and much longer before Zimbabweans begin to roll up their sleeves for jabs. Of course countries that produce the vaccine will ensure their citizens get the shots first before the doses are shipped elsewhere. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); A lot of resources will be needed to ensure that almost everyone under the sun is vaccinated. Billions of doses will have to be allocated across the globe, infrastructure set up for vaccinating people at a massive scale.
Top WHO official Michael Ryan gave the world a reality check at a regular press conference on May 14 when he suggested that “this virus may never go away.” University of Alberta virologist David Marchant, who has spent his research life looking for a treatment for the dangerous respiratory syncytial virus, agreed, adding vaccines aren’t a certainty. “I’m not optimistic that we’ll find a vaccine in the next few years…” said Marchant, who holds the Canada Research Chair in Viral Pathogenesis. Of course we’re not as pessimistic as Ryan and Marchant — we believe the time to roll up our sleeves will come and we’ll beat corona in the end. For now let’s do our best by observing personal hygiene, limiting exposure and staying safe. Everyone should follow WHO recommendations religiously. But if we don’t pull through… if something happens to one or all of us… maybe that’s the way it was meant to be.