 THE local football fraternity has been plunged into further mourning following the death of former Dynamos chairperson Phillip Mugadza in Harare yesterday.  By the time of going to print last night, the family was still to release more details on his passing on.  The 59-year-old former DeMbare boss’s death comes hot on the heels of that of former Premier Soccer League chief executive Chris Sambo, who was buried yesterday at Greendale Cemetery.  Mugadza’s young brother Godfrey confirmed the sad development which hit the family at a time when the they were going through a difficult period.  The family is battling to repatriate the body of Freddy “Pasuwa” Mugadza, who collapsed and died in Atlanta, United States, on April 10.  However, due to the coronavirus (Covid-19)-induced global travel restrictions, the Mugadza family is facing hurdles in bringing Freddy’s remains home. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });   “We were notified that big airlines would start flying soon and we were now expecting his body this week or next week.”
The Zimbabwe Football Association paid tribute to Mugadza for his service to the sport.  “Zifa commiserates with the Mugadza and football family following the passing on of former Dynamos FC chairperson…Mugadza,” the association’s spokesperson Xolisani Gwesela said yesterday.  “Mugadza was an astute administrator who served the beautiful game with dedication and commitment. We are saddened by this great loss.”  Phillip, a Harare businessman with interests in hair salons and property, came to prominence by using his wealth to personally bankroll DeMbare in the 90s.  However, he ventured into mainstream football administration when he was appointed as the club’s vice-chairperson in the interim executive led by fellow Harare businessman Ignatius Pamire at the turn of the millennium.  Some of the administrators he worked with during his time at the Glamour Boys are the current board chairperson Bernard Marriott Lusengo, the late Owen Chandemale, Robson Rundaba, the late Jimmy Finch and Victor Nyaumwe.  
While the older brother was making moves in the boardroom, his sibling Freddy was making a name for himself as DeMbare’s leading supporter.  Before migrating to the US, Freddy was an avid Dynamos supporter with Kalisto Pasuwa his favourite player.
During those days, Freddy, who was 42 at the time of his death, achieved notoriety for his violent clashes with opposing teams’ fans.  He also had many running battles with sports journalists who dared to cover his misdemeanours in the stands.
To his credit though, Freddy later matured to become one of the most influential fans in local football despite migrating to the United States in 2006.  Using social media, he was able to remain relevant in local football despite living thousands of kilometres away.
Using his humour and wit on social networks, Freddy was able to unite football fans from all teams and bridged the gap between the young and the old through his anecdotes.  Former Warriors and Dynamos coach Pasuwa was devastated by Freddy’s death back in April.
“There was this match at Rufaro Stadium back in 1997, when I was still new at Dynamos, and I was introduced as a substitute by coach Mhofu (Sunday Chidzambwa),” Pasuwa told the local media. “He was running on the terraces shouting ‘Italian’. That’s how I got that nickname. Afterwards, he told me l was his favourite player and person.
“He would do virtually everything for me, from paying for my hair cut, to buying goodies.
“He was crazy about me. At first, I wasn’t comfortable with it but, with time, I realised he really liked me.”
Pasuwa added: “We grew to become friends although he was older than me.  “When my father died, he phoned begging the family to wait a bit before taking the body to the cemetery.
“His wish was granted. He was just something else. I have never met a super fan like him.”  