 Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@Dailynews.co.zw

ZIFA has admitted there is an urgent need to upgrade the standard and performance of their match officials after local referees were snubbed from taking part at the 2022 Qatar Fifa World Cup.  Fifa recently released a list of 81 match officials who will be in charge of the first World Cup tournament to feature 24 teams.  The African referees who will be part of the jamboree are Redouane Jiyed (Morocco), Sadok Selmi (Tunisia), Victor Gomes (South Africa), Ndala Ngambo (Democratic Republic of Congo) and Maguette Ndiaye (Senegal).  Bamlak Tessema (Ethiopia), Ghead Grisha (Egypt) and Bakary Gassama (Gambia) will also represent the continent as Video Assistant Referees (VAR).  Retired referee Brighton Mudzamiri made history when he officiated at the 2002 Fifa World Cup in Korea/Japan as a linesman. Before that, no local match official had taken part at this global football event.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); That year, Mudzamiri also officiated at the 2002 Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) and was part of the team that handled the final between Cameroon and Senegal.  Another retired referee Felix Tangawarima, who now works as a Fifa instructor, also officiated at the 2001 Fifa Confederations Cup in Korea/Japan, the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games, as well as the 2000 and 2002 Afcon finals.
The last Zimbabwean referee to officiate at a major tournament was Kenny Marange at the 2008 Afcon finals in Ghana.  Since Tangawarima, Marange and Mudzamiri’s retirement, local match officials have missed out on the grand stage.  On the domestic front, the men and women in black have courted a lot of controversy with some dubious calls they have made.  A number of top flight and second-tier matches have been abandoned or rocked by violence following accusations of bias by referees and their assistants.  Zifa Referees Committee chairperson Bryton Malandule admitted they are concerned with the continued omission of their members from international assignments.   “Maybe just a background on how these referees are selected for these major tournaments; every four years after World Cup, Fifa chooses referees for the next World Cup and will put them under special supervision so that they will be ready for the task.  “In our case, none was selected to be part of that list. And closer to home at Caf, they have what is called the Caf A list and I think we only have one referee on that list.  “So we need to really work hard to ensure our own makes the grade.”
As a result, Zifa is now working on a special project to ensure local referees improve their performance and get the desired international recognition from both Fifa and Caf. “One does not easily get called to officiate at these major tournaments. It’s a process and as a country, we need to do more especially in as far as the development of referees is concerned,” Malandule said.  “If you look at people like Tangawarima and Mudzamiri, they worked hard to officiate at that top level. It’s high time we take development seriously.  “There are no shortcuts in everything and the earlier we realise that the better. The good thing is that we are already working on a Young Talent Project in which we are unearthing the next generation of referees.  “This project works deliberately with referees that are below the age of 25 and most of them were promoted to Division One. It’s unfortunate that football has been halted by what is currently going on across the globe.”  All hope is not lost though for Zimbabwean match officials as Malandule believes there is a crop of upcoming referees that will soon be getting international assignments. “I’m confident we will have one or two referees at the next edition of Afcon finals. Currently we have Thomas Kusosa and Brighton Chimene, who have made a lot of strides and I believe they will make the grade very soon,” he added.  “I’m working with Tangawarima to ensure some of the referees also make the grade at Cosafa tournaments.” 