 Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday, August 15, 2020, addressed the nation from the ramparts of the Red Fort on the occasion of 74th Indian Independence Day. After paying tribute to people who laid down their lives during the freedom struggle, PM Modi began with praising corona warriors and the challenges posed by Covid-19 pandemic. PM Modi in his speech spoke about various topics including coronavirus, Ladakh clash, Atmanirbhar Bharat mission and the minimum age for women to get married. PM Modi also pays homage to the contributions of all Indians who won us our Independence and all members of the armed forces and personnel who guard our independence and keep us safe. PM Modi also announced the National Digital Health Mission and said every Indian will have their own Health ID. Highlights from PM Modi’s Independence Day speech: ·         Prime Minister Modi reiterated the mission of Atmanirbhar Bharat or the aim to make India self-reliant. PM Modi said, “The mindset of free India should be ‘vocal for local’. We should appreciate our local products, if we don’t do this then our products will not get the opportunity to do better and will not get encouraged.” He added, “Today, many big companies are turning towards India. ·         Speaking about the ongoing strife with China in Ladakh, PM Modi said that those who dared to challenge India’s sovereignty were given a befitting response by the Indian soldiers in Ladakh. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He said, “Protecting India’s sovereignty is of prime importance to us. What we can do and our soldiers can do to protect this sovereignty, the world has seen with the events in Ladakh.” ·         The Prime Minister also announced the National Digital Health Mission and said every Indian will have their own Health ID. This ID and the health profile will have all details like the diseases they have, the treatment they have received, doctor visits, medicines being used. 4. PM Modi said the government is reconsidering the minimum age for marriage of women and daughters of the country. He said, “We have set up a committee to reconsider the minimum age for marriage of our daughters. ·         The prime minister in his speech spoke about efforts of his government towards women empowerment and the achievements of women in India in major areas of workforce. Modi pointed out that now women have an opportunity to have permanent employment in the Indian Army and Indian Navy. He highlighted that over 22 crore women have got money in their Jan Dhan bank accounts. Also, the government has provided around 5 crore sanitary pads to poor women in rural India. ·         While speaking about Covid-19 vaccine, PM Modi said that not one, India has three vaccine candidates going through different stages of clinical trials. PM Modi also said that once these vaccines get all required clearances, mass-scale production will be started and all arrangements are already in place to make them available to all. ·         Addressing the nation, the Prime Minister said that India will spend more than Rs 100 lakh crore on the National Infrastructure Pipeline Project. He said, “There is a need to give a new direction to the overall infrastructure development of the country to move India towards modernity at a fast pace. ·         PM Modi also announced an agriculture infrastructure fund of Rs 1 lakh crore. He said, “An important priority of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ is Aatmanirbhar agriculture and Aatmanirbhar farmer. To provide modern infrastructure to the farmers of the country, an ‘Agriculture Infrastructure Fund’ of Rs 1 lakh crore has been created.” ·         PM Modi also spoke about the Ram Mandir construction and the bhoomi pujan ceremony he performed on August 5 in Ayodhya. He said, “Construction of a Ram Temple in Ayodhya started 10 days ago. Ramjanmabhoomi issue that prevailed for centuries, has been resolved peacefully. The conduct of people of the country has been unprecedented and is an inspiration for the future.” ·         PM Narendra Modi also talked about biodiversity in India and said the number of tigers in India has gone up over the past few years. He said, “Tiger and lion population in the country has gone up exponentially and now the government will launch ‘Project Lion’ and ‘Project Dolphin’ to create better environments for majestic Lion and Dolphins.” ·         Modi further said, “We are expanding NCC in border areas and special training will be provided to about 1 lakh new NCC cadets.”  