 Myles Matarise
STAFF WRITER
matarisem@dailynews.co.zw CASSAVA Fintech International (CFI) and the Liquid Telecom Group (LTG) have announced the launch of Sasai Wi-Fi Finder, a game-changer in driving digital and financial inclusion in Africa.  Sasai Wi-Fi which will be offered across the continent was announced yesterday and is set to be rolled at thousands of hotspots across Africa.  The partnership seeks to offer a low-cost solution for connectivity and to expand these services throughout the continent.   A 2019 report by the Global System for Mobile Communications shows that affordability remains a significant barrier to Internet adoption in Africa, resulting in social, digital and financial exclusion.    Mandivenga further added that through this platform, they plan to establish an expansive network of data access points across Africa and build ‘‘Africa’s Missing Network’’ through partnering with broadband providers, Internet Service Providers and local community hubs.  Group chief operating officer of LTG, Ahmad Mokhles said they are proud that their best-in-class broadband infrastructure network is the backbone of this service and is enabling more Africans to access the digital and financial benefits of the Internet.   The intuitive and easy to use Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will be an in-App feature on the Sasai super App that will allow users to identify hotspots at which they can access affordable data.   “We designed this service to be as easy-to-use as possible. A smartphone user will get free connectivity on-the-go through accessing the #SasaiWi-Fi Finder network to download the Sasai App and gain access to a wide range of in-app services,” said chief operating officer of Sasai, Tapera Mushoriwa.     Mushoriwa further added that when a new smartphone user has registered on the Sasai App, or when an existing Sasai App user opens the App, they receive automatic notification ‘pop-up’ alerts showing available #SasaiWi-Fi Finder hotspots nearby.   The Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will allow greater connectivity in a variety of locations, including retail, healthcare, education, government and small business trade facilities.   The App will also give millions of Africans access to social, entertainment and on-demand services offered on the Sasai super App, including Sasai Moments.   The partnership between CFI and LTG will see the roll-out of the Sasai Wi-Fi Finder in Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and South Africa in phases over the coming months.    