 MBANO Manor Hotel, an all-suite premium luxury hotel based in the resort town of Victoria Falls, officially opened its doors to the public yesterday. The luxury boutique hotel, conceptualised and developed by Mati Nyazema, pictured, comprises 19 suites which include a masterpiece Forest Villa. Support services include reception, lounge, bar, back of house, kitchen and swimming pool, in a teak forest setting adjacent to Zambezi National Park.   Nyazema, the founder and executive director of Mbano Manor Hotel, is proud to be the first black female Zimbabwean to conceptualise and develop a luxury boutique hotel.   She has over 30 years experience in the hospitality industry including involvement in global travel companies and hotel start-ups across several African countries   She added that the opening of the hotel was in line with the National Tourism Recovery and Growth Strategy launched in Victoria Falls by President Emmerson Mnangagwa yesterday. The hotel, which is spread on a four-acre estate, blends with nature as it is located within the ancient teak forest of the Zambezi national Park. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });   According to the Mbano Manor Hotel founder, the development of the hotel was funded by local pension funds and an international investor. Additional funding was also obtained from the Standard Chartered Pension Fund, and from two Minerva Pension Funds.   Nyazema, who leads the management team of the hotel, together with general manager Jonathan Ellway, is confident that Mbano Manor Hotel will be a favourite for tourists. The hotel is located on Old Kazungula road, on the edge of town, only four kilometres from the entrance to the Victoria Falls rainforest, a position which enables visitors to enjoy the best of all worlds – a tranquil hotel setting, wildlife safaris, adventure sport, or a tour of the Victoria Falls Rain Forest and its majestic views of the world’s largest curtain of water. Mbano Manor Hotel has launched a special offer of USD95 per person per night bed and breakfast, including high tea. “It is the hand of God. The short to medium term business future will be tough. But failure is not an option,” Nyazema concludes.