 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE United Nations (UN) says Zimbabwe urgently needs US$85 million to respond to the country’s health crisis, as well as the needs of vulnerable citizens in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, the Daily News reports. This comes as the country’s health system has hit an all-time low — with nurses and doctors currently on strike over a lack of Covid-19 personal protective equipment (PPE) and poor remuneration. It also comes as some public and private hospitals are turning away patients who do not have results showing that they do not carry the lethal virus, despite the government’s warning against this practice. The deputy spokesperson for the UN secretary general, Farhan Haq, said at the weekend that the UN and its partners were working to support the country’s health system and its response to Covid-19 — including through boosting surveillance and testing. Zimbabwe’s health crisis has continued to deepen in the wake of Covid-19, as nurses and doctors have downed their tools to force the government to solve their long standing challenges, including poor remuneration, lack of medicines, medical equipment and PPE. “We gave the government a two-week strike notice indicating the challenges that we are facing as doctors and nothing was done to address these challenges. “The Health ministry’s then acting permanent secretary, Gibson Mhlanga, wrote to us and asked us not to go on strike without giving tangible solutions on how the government is going to address our challenges. “As such, our members were not happy about this and a decision was reached to proceed with the strike as planned,” the secretary general of the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA), Aaron Musara, told the Daily News recently. “It’s sad that things have turned out this way because nothing much was happening in hospitals given that nurses and other health workers have been on strike for over a month. The situation has just worsened,” he added. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Similarly, nurses have said they will continue with their strike, which has been going on for more than a month. “We reiterate our position that we will not return to work without proper remuneration, as we are incapacitated.
“We further reiterate that without adequate PPE we will also not go back because our hospitals have proven to be Covid-19 hotspots and the unprotected health workers have been the most vulnerable victims as the numbers of those infected are increasing. This prompted President Emmerson Mnangagwa to recently appeal to the nurses and doctors to return to work, saying his government was working towards addressing their plight. Mnangagwa has since appointed Vice pPresident Constantino Chiwenga as the new Health and Child Care minister, and Air Commodore Jasper Chimedza as permanent secretary.