 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE government has loosened coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown regulations to allow immigrants who are polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-negative on arrival to quarantine at home and also reviewed the curfew to start from 8pm to 6am with immediate effect, the Daily News reports. As of Monday, the country had recorded 5 308 Covid-19 cases, including 135 deaths and 3 848 recoveries.
Addressing journalists during a post-Cabinet media briefing held in Harare yesterday, Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa further said that Cabinet had revisited business operating hours to end at 16:30pm. “Cabinet has further directed that immigrants who are PCR-negative on arrival will no longer be detained, but be put on home quarantine and reviews will be conducted by the rapid response teams in that locality. Those who test positive on arrival will be placed in isolation centres,” Mutsvangwa said. “In view of the surge in positive local cases, Cabinet approved guidelines to help families manage Covid-19 cases at home. Furthermore, in order to curtail the spike in infections Zimbabwe requires a more robust testing regime. She further revealed that with regards to primary and secondary education, Cabinet had noted that the sector was continuing with its preparations for the reopening of schools for final examination classes. This comes as the government recently deferred the reopening of schools which were closed in March this year in efforts to mitigate the spread of the Covid-19. “The developed and approved guidelines that were put in place for the June 2020 examinations will be used for the holding of the final examinations in November/December,” Mutsvangwa said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Mutsvangwa further indicated that Cabinet had approved remodelling of Agribank Pvt Limited as a dedicated Land Bank and is expected to deliver a number of specific outputs “It (the remodelling) will strengthen and diversify existing agricultural and rural financial services for sustainable agrarian reform for accelerated development. The bank will also provide investment support for A1, A2 and small-scale commercial farmers (matenganyika) who have not been supported by commercial banks,” she said. Speaking at the same event, Foreign Affairs minister Sibusiso Moyo dismissed reports that there were gross human rights violations in the country, saying the videos circulating on social media were stage managed. “Some of these issues are propagated by different personalities and we are saying that when we take for example the reburial of the remains of liberation struggle heroes which are lined up because there has been an exhumation project and there are skeletons lying across…and then that picture is taken and is propagated by ourselves and it comes a consuming point for the external,” Moyo said while appealing to Zimbabweans to desist from painting the country in a negative way.