South African academic Nicole Beardsworth has pointed out that we misquoted her in our story in the Daily News On Sunday of July 26, which reported on a virtual meeting that was organised by SAPES Trust last month, and discussed Pretoria’s role in Zimbabwe’s ongoing political crisis. We accept her contention that our report did not accurately capture what she said, and in that regard, we apologise unreservedly to her for the inconvenience that our article caused her. Below we report verbatim and in full all her contributions during the SAPES virtual meeting: “So when we think about what we see currently in Zimbabwe, we see the same kind of thing. We see intransigence in Zimbabwe, we see the attempts to change the constitution which we all know are regressive rather than progressive. We’re seeing the repeal of Posa and its replacement with equally bad legislation. “So there’s this attempt to demonstrate reform without the substance of reform. That’s the first thing. Then we don’t see the kind of multilateralism that we say during the Zimbabwe crisis from within Sadc there’s really no commitment to pushing a harder line on Zimbabwe, and so South Africa, in the absence of that multilateral stance, is less likely to want to take a leading stance to pushing for that. “And then finally it comes back to — as many people have said previously — balancing the carrot and the stick. Which has always been a question for SA-Zimbabwe relations because the two countries are pretty fundamentally inter-twined, and currently South Africa has run out of carrots. The sticks we have are (a) not very effective, and (b) we’re not very committed to using them. “So I think for the meantime we’re unlikely to see any change in this relationship, although it is important to remember what Piers (Pigou) pointed out about the recent statement by the minister and hopefully that is borne out. “From Covid and a myriad of other crises. One of which is potentially instability around livelihoods. And the question of xenophobia which many people have brought up is very fundamental to this. It’s in South Africa’s interests for Zimbabweans to be able to go home and be able to live dignified lives, but at the moment it’s just hard to see how SA can influence that process. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “So, I guess what I’d like to see is the Zimbabwean opposition coming together as it did during the 2008 crisis where it spoke with a single voice. They had joint press briefings, they sent delegations to Sadc, delegations to SA opposition parties to get Zimbabwe back on the agenda. Only when it starts to look like it might hurt the ANC will we see the government take a stronger line on Zimbabwe”