Mugove Tafirenyika
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zw POLITICAL tensions continue to escalate in the country, with a bristling President Emmerson Mnangagwa accusing some local churches yesterday of advancing a dangerous agenda against the government, the Daily News reports. In addition, Mnangagwa also challenged church leaders whom he said might be harbouring political ambitions to formally swap the pulpit for politics and openly start their own political parties. This comes as Mnangagwa and the government have come under withering criticism from both the Church and rights groups, over alleged gross breaches of human rights in the country. It also comes as South Africa President Cyril Ramaphosa is trying to end Zimbabwe’s long-running political crisis, which has once again attracted international attention. Addressing the Zanu PF politburo in Harare yesterday, Mnangagwa said the ruling party had generally always enjoyed cordial relations with the Church, dating back to the years of Zimbabwe’s liberation struggle. The angry Zanu PF leader also accused alleged enemies of his government of fanning violence in the country, in a bid to force him out of power — adding that these people had failed in their plans. Rights groups have claimed that dozens of opposition figures and activists have been tortured and assaulted in a retributive exercise by suspected security agents. Tensions were further stoked last week when Catholic bishops in Zimbabwe issued a stinging letter in which they accused the government of carrying out human rights abuses and instilling fear among the populace. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The bishops said the country was suffering from “a multi-layered crisis” — including economic collapse, deepening poverty, corruption and human rights abuses. This also comes as Mnangagwa, who ascended to power via a popular military coup in November 2017, has come under growing pressure from long-suffering Zimbabweans over his government’s failure to mend the country’s broken economy. As a result of Zimbabwe’s escalating woes, Ramaphosa has stepped in, appointing special envoys — former South Africa vice president Baleka Mbete and ex-ministers Sydney Mufamadi and Ngoako Ramatlhodi — to try and end the decades-long crisis. The appointment of the envoys came after authorities were accused of gross human rights violations, following the government’s heavy deployment of police and soldiers to thwart the foiled July 31 mass protests. South Africa and its leaders — including former presidents Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma — have in the past successfully mediated Zimbabwe’s political crises. A decade ago, both Mbeki and Zuma helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and former president Robert Mugabe — who are both late — following the hotly disputed 2008 presidential election. Zuma also assisted in minimising Zimbabwe’s chaotic approach to the equally disputed 2013 national elections.
Meanwhile, Zanu PF has sacked politburo members Cleveria Chizema and Tendai Savanhu for allegedly showing disloyalty to the former liberation movement and its leaders. Chizema’s jettisoning was announced by Mnangagwa during yesterday’s politburo meeting. Last month, the former liberation movement suspended Chizema for allegedly being involved in organising the foiled July 31 demos and for allegedly trying to drive a wedge between Mnangagwa and one of his deputies, Constantino Chiwenga. Acting Zanu PF spokesperson Patrick Chinamasa said then that the politburo had suspended Chizema after she allegedly failed to report anti-Mnangagwa fliers that were delivered to her home in March this year.