 Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw WARRIORS forward Prince Dube pocketed US$50 000 in signing-on fees after completing his move to Tanzanian giants Azam recently, the Daily News has learnt. The 23-year-old former Highlanders striker, penned a three-year deal with the Tanzanian giants and will be pocketing a salary of between US$3 500 to US$4 000. Dube’s move to Azam will also see Bosso smiling all the way to the bank as they are believed to have received US$50 000 and will earn more if the player is sold elsewhere after inserting a sell-on clause in their agreement with Azam. This is the second time that Dube has a joined a foreign league after his earlier transfer to South Africa’s SuperSport United which did not last as he returned to Zimbabwe without making any impact in the Super Diski. Dube is hoping that the presence of his former Bosso teammate Bruce Kangwa and ex-FC Platinum midfielder Never Tigere at Azam will help him settle immediately in Dar es Salaam. “I just want to do good things for the team, I want to score goals and make sure the team does well, we are a big team and we must fight for titles,” Dube said during his unveiling. “I am ready to take up the new challenge because Azam is a big team and as a team, we have to fight for it and be ready to give the fans what they want, to win the title and come to the end of the season, we should be leading, smiling all the way.” The former Bosso forward is hoping to use his move to Azam as a stepping stone to more professional leagues in Europe. Respected player agent George Deda, who played an important role in brokering the deal, said Dube is in high spirits and ready to deliver. “He is a boy full of confidence. He is someone who is ready to prove himself.
“In SA he was never given enough time to prove himself and he knows this is his time,” Deda said.
“He is looking forward to the new challenge. You can actually tell he is motivated and looking forward and wants to make a name.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });