 IT HAS always been difficult to single out the best Zimbabwean male bodybuilder of all time due to the high calibre of athletes that have graced the stage. There are a number of bodybuilders who made a lasting impact on the sport from Grant Henderson, who graced the cover of Ironman magazine in the United States while Tapiwa Twoboy had a flawless physique. George Takundwa won the Mr Zimbabwe title four straight years before he was injured in a car accident.
Takundwa could have dominated for many more years had it not been for that road mishap while Innocent Choga had a long glittering career winning the same title six times. Nigel Bothwell won the Southern African Championships in 1978 while Bible Mhizha conquered the light heavies at All Africa Championships in 1992. Mhizha also came seventh at IFBB Worlds in Prague that same year while Givemore Marume’s career was hampered after the Mr Zimbabwe contest failed to take place between 2009 and 2012. Maybe Marume could have won five titles because he won Pro-fitness Open in 2009 which was the most prestigious competition that year. Vaughan Carl is regarded as the father of extreme condition while some argue that Chenai Mabwere was the master of the craft. Collin Mushunje Marimba, a seasoned judge and two- time national middleweight champion will always argue that Choga is the greatest Zimbabwe bodybuilder of all time. Why? Because he won the national title more than anyone else — a record six times. He will tell you that Choga won his first senior national title at the age of 22. He will convince you further by arguing that the Mufakose-born athlete competed for almost three decades. 
Multi-talented Sensei Mugove Muhambi, who has done well as a bodybuilder and Kyokushin karate, also tipped his hat for Choga. “I think I will stand with Choga, he was one of the greatest even when I was growing up we used to read about him in the Parade Magazine. He’s a man who won Mr Zim back to back consecutively for six years so to me he’s gonna be my best forever. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The sport’s stakeholders believe leaving out Marume from the discussion is unfair because apart from winning the Mr Zimbabwe title four times, he also won Ironman six times. Marume also won the inaugural Profitness Open and once defeated a great athlete in Michael Ardonis at Shameen Classic. In recent years, Champion Chienderamwano has completely dominated the sport with his extreme conditioning in the heavyweight division which saw him win the national title on three consecutive occasions. There is also the likes of Paul Goredema, who became the first Zimbabwean bodybuilder to place in the top three at an IFBB competition rated international. Goredema went on to become the first Zimbabwean Open bodybuilder to compete in a non-amateur division in IFBB. The fact that Goredema defeated the mighty Tari Chirume and Munashe Mutandirotya on his way up also adds further weight to his claim for glory. “Let me narrow it to two; Takundwa was balanced at least according to pictures that I saw. He was also proportional. Proportions are a good indicator of one’s ability to participate in bodybuilding. “Choga had very good body parts of centre points. Oh boy I saw him during the late 90s; what an awesome back.
“I think it’s now Choga vs Takundwa. I am dropping Givemore and Bible with a heavy heart. Bible and Givemore were awesome. Yaah it’s a difficult one. “Choga won Ironman and Zimbabwe junior three and two times respectively. He has been doing research with regards to training, body types e.tc. What a career! Choga also placed eighth at an IFBB Grand Prix in 1991 in Siberia. “It is also important for stakeholders to know that George competed with Lee Harney at the IFBB World Championships. Harney won that competition and turned professional. “Greatness is about attributes that are more than average in degree or quality. It’s about extraordinary exploits that eclipse that of all others. “In the history of Zimbabwe bodybuilding one such name is none other than the living legend Mhizha.
“Mhiza is the only Zimbabwean bodybuilder who won and successfully defended national titles both locally and regionally. He won Mr Zimbabwe three times (1985, 86, 88) when bodybuilding was so tough. “There was no access to state-of-the-art information like nowadays where one can just go on the Internet and google. In those days it was all about trial and error.