 Godknows Matarutse and Nigel Matongorere A SURVEY carried out by the Daily News on Sunday can reveal that the majority of Premier Soccer League (PSL) players are earning a pittance as clubs struggle to cope with the effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Most of the players are still earning the same salary they negotiated with their clubs in December 2019 and January when everything seemed normal and the 2020 campaign was set to kick off in March. However, when the country recorded its first Covid-19 positive case that same month, the government then declared a nationwide lockdown which banned public gatherings and all sporting events from taking place. Five months later, the virus is now spreading rapidly and as of yesterday, 102 people had died from the confirmed 4 451 cases. While the country is going through such a torrid phase, most top flight players have been hit by a double whammy as their salaries have evaporated due to inflation. When most of the players negotiated their deals, the interbank rate saw the Zimbabwe dollar trading at 1:15 with United States dollar. However, at present day, that rate has risen to 1:72 with inflation figures between May 2019 and May 2020 standing at 785 percent. The situation in the top flight is now so dire that some clubs are paying their players as little as $2 000 and $3 000. The financial disparity in the league is also glaring as other clubs are paying their players as high as $30 000 and in US dollars. There are four teams – Black Rhinos, Tenax, Whawha and Cranborne Bullets – from the uniformed forces in the top flight where players that have been attested into service earn an average salary of $12 000 on top of the US$75 allowances. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); However, these teams have civilian players, who are not getting any single cent since they are yet to be attested into the army or the prison service. Footballers’ Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) secretary general Thomas Sweswe told the Daily News on Sunday they are greatly concerned by the salaries some of their members are earning in the top flight. “We understand there are contracts but look at what is currently prevailing at the moment; salaries are being eroded every month. Surely, a club cannot continue to pay a player what he was getting in January, it does not tally at all,” Sweswe said. “We are not saying all the clubs are not paying well. There are other clubs that are doing a great job in making sure their players are comfortable and we want to applaud them for that. “We carried a survey with the PSL, Division One and Women’s football players and found that their salaries are inadequate. It’s a sorry state actually, and something needs to be done immediately to close that gap.” The former Kaizer Chiefs, Dynamos and Highlanders defender added: “Players are suffering, honestly speaking. Our hope as Fuz is that when football finally returns, everyone will be happy. We also applaud Fifa for coming up with a Covid-19 relief fund to cushion the clubs and players, its huge really. “Hopefully this fund will reach the players because with no players, there is no football and they are the most affected because they have lost out on many allowances as surviving on salary alone is not enough.” Local football agent George Deda told the Daily News that local players have been reduced to paupers. “One thing I can say is that what is happening in our local league is a very sad situation; our players have been reduced to destitute,” Deda said. “Some of the highest earners at some clubs are earning than US$30 and these are national team players who have families to look after. “They need to pay rentals and buy food but that is not possible due to the meager salaries they are receiving.” 