Vasco Chaya LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zw YESTERDAY marked exactly 15 years since Simon Chimbetu breathed his last and today the arts sector is celebrating the late musician’s legacy through an online concert.  Popularly known as Chopper,  Chimbetu died in 2005 at the age of 50.   Tonight’s event will be held on Ngoda TV on Facebook.  The event will see Suluman, Tryson, Allan, Douglas and Saiwe Chimbetu sharing the stage. The Chimbetu family will be supported by Ammi Jamanda, Obert Chari and Kurai Makore. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });   After Simon’s departure, his band disintegrated to form four groups with one led by his son Suluman, the other by his younger brother Allan while Tryson and Douglas also formed their own outfits.
Chopper left a rich musical legacy with all-time hits such as Dzandipedza Mafuta, Saina, Mwana Wedangwe, Marirangwe, Comma, Pane Asipo, Ndarangarira Gamba and Rudo Ibofu among others.  Suluman once told this publication he has no plans to remix his father’s hits.   “Though I am the son of Simon, the legend, I am glad that I have managed to distinguish my works from his, and fans know me as Sulu,” he said.  Some of Suluman’s studio projects include Ndomusiya Nani, Reverse Deal, Non-Stop, Gunship and Jamboree among others.  Early this week, Suluman penned a letter to Chopper expressing how he misses him. “This weekend completes a whole 15 years since you left this earth. We still miss you as family and so do many of your allies and legion of fans. One of your close friends reached out to me with a photo of you, the late mdara Briam and him in the streets of Harare. He shared stories of how you were not only good with music but with people too.  ‘‘I’m glad I see that clearly you left behind a legacy with faithful loyalists who have stood by me and the rest of the family.  ‘‘On the15th we gather as family and give it our all as the custodians of the Dendera Dynasty. It’s for you baba,” reads part of the letter to his legendary father. 