 By Preetika Kaur One year after India repealed Article 370 and revoked Jammu and Kashmir’s special status, what has changed for the Kashmiri youth? In a surprise move last August, India revoked the special status granted to the state of Jammu and Kashmir and divided the state into two union territories – Jammu and Kashmir, which would have a legislature, and Ladakh, which would be without a legislature. Simply put, this meant that India legally modified Article 370 of the Constitution in order to ensure a resident of Jammu and Kashmir was granted rights equivalent to those enjoyed by any other citizen of India. Accordingly, a Kashmiri could now seek greater democracy with local-level governance bodies or Panchayats empowered with more rights at par with other States of India. He/she could now demand answerability from public offices covered under the Right to Information Act, normally applicable elsewhere in India. She could also obtain quality education as mandated under the Right to Education. For a Kashmiri girl, who wanted to marry an Indian resident outside her state, she could now retain ownership of land within the state. For Kashmiri women, life has only changed for the better. They are now covered under the central laws of the India which protect and promote their social, economic and political rights, besides those of children and under-privileged sections. Notably, it was only in October last year that Kashmiri women benefitted from reservation in mainstream politics. Few direct benefits with the abrogation of this article include 106 people-friendly laws and nine constitutional amendments of the Indian constitution made applicable now in the State. This means many progressive laws like right to education, maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens act 2001 will be applicable. This will help the most vulnerable section of the society.   All anti-corruption central laws including the Whistleblower Act will be applicable and oversight by central agencies will ensure reduced corruption. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Today, development in Kashmir has taken root. Dedicated work on massive infrastructure like the construction of dams, electrification projects, roads, bridges and highways has already begun in good stead. Foundation work for new medical and engineering colleges has started. And focused schemes being rolled out for the marginally and self-employed in the diverse fields of horticulture, carpentry, handloom and handicrafts, saffron cultivation, among others have already yielded satisfactory results. Perhaps, the only industry summoned to the graveyard after the abrogation of Article 370 is that of terrorism from across the border. Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations had long been out rightly rejected by the Kashmiri youth. It had always been outside forces that had unabashedly run a system of fomenting, harbouring, financing, propagating and sustaining terror in Jammu and Kashmir and the region beyond. Development and empowerment of the Kashmiri youth with skills and a secure livelihood is resultantly antithetical to the interests of those who have till now been thriving on hate speech, invocations of blood bath and pogroms and deprivation of Kashmiri youth from a life of promises and possibilities. It is not surprising then to understand how Article 370 has been a stumbling block to the development of the State and is being used by external forces as an alibi for proxy war. It took just a year, after the abrogation of the article that has been stonewalling all development and progress in the last seventy years, for the residents of the state to know that positive changes are finally taking place. For a Kashmiri from the 90s, childhood was limited to a disrupted schooling marred by street protests, frequent scenes of stone pelting, civic disturbance, unofficial bandhs / shutdowns and resulting curbs and curfews. Scraping of article 370 is like our wounds being healed with the children, youth and elderly being given a chance to thrive again. The childhood of missed opportunities is now a distant past with the Kashmiri youth now presented with hopes, opportunities, aspirations and dreams that are made possible to realise in this naturally endowed scenic State. (Kaur was born and brought up in Kashmir and now lives in Harare)