 HARARE –  Stung by meagre salaries at their respective clubs and the devastating effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19), a number of Premier Soccer League (PSL) stars have temporarily hung up their boots to ensure they bring food on the table by venturing into different projects. With hopes for the 2020 Castle Lager Premiership season kick-off increasingly getting slimmer owing to the escalating number of Covid-19 cases in the country, footballers have not been spared as their livelihoods, just like everyone else have been affected. Initially, the 2020 campaign should have commenced in March but had to be postponed after the government imposed an indefinite nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of the virus. In fact, there are now fears that this year’s campaign would have to be cancelled altogether as the cases continue to increase. As of yesterday, Zimbabwe had recorded 97 deaths from the confirmed 4 395 cases since the country reported its first positive case in March. What is more worrying is the fact that most of those deaths and positive cases have been recorded in the last four weeks as the virus seems to have reached its peak. The Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) and the PSL are hoping they will be given a green light by the government for training to resume next month and hopefully matches to follow later. However, those plans for a September start might be put on ice by the government due to the high number of new cases being reported daily. Last month, Zifa announced they will be providing clubs, regions, women’s football and referees a bailout package after receiving US$1,8 million from Fifa and Caf. But there has been contestation over the relief package after the association converted the foreign currency into the volatile Zimbabwe dollar which resulted in clubs refusing to accept the offer. While Zifa and the teams are haggling over the disbursements, it is the players who are suffering due to the prolonged inactivity. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Generally, when the season is on, footballers maximise their income by other add-ons like winning bonuses, travelling and camping allowances. As a result, some players have had to be innovative during these desperate times in order to put food on the table. Using social media, a number of local football stars have ventured into e-commerce projects to supplement their incomes. Ngezi Platinum Stars midfielder Gerald Takwara is now trading cell phones and alternative energy products. “Phones for sale…All phones available. Solar batteries for sale… All sizes available,” the former Ajax Cape Town midfielder wrote on his Facebook wall recently. The issue of players’ welfare during the lockdown came to the fore two months ago when the CAPS United squad besieged the business premises of club vice-president Nhamo Tutisani demanding their outstanding salaries. The players and Tutisani exchanged harsh words during an episode which left the club’s reputation in tatters. At the end, police had to be called in to disperse the players, who were threatening to stage a sleep-in at Tutisani’s business premises.