 Going against what many people regard as conventional wisdom, Tanya Muzinda of Harare has spent 10 years enjoying and making a name for herself in motocross, once considered a male domain. Aged only five, she took up motocross and has created a unique niche for herself in this popular two-wheel sport, sparking even greater interest in it among other female competitors and spectators. With a decade of experience now behind her, Tanya’s ambitions remain high as she hopes one day to be an international champion in this chosen field of endeavour.   Motocross is a sport that has traditionally attracted male participants and Zimbabwe has been fortunate to have enjoyed great success among motocross riders in local and regional competitions, including African Motorcycle Union events hosted here for riders from all over Africa, sometimes attracting riders from even further field. Tanya’s family — and her network of supporters — have had to acknowledge that motocross is expensive and, as a result, sacrifices have had to be made. Home schooling is part of this and although this has meant not doing things people her age are doing, “I feel that everything will be worth it in the end.” What is it that makes motocross so appealing? “It gives you freedom,” she said. “I feel like a bird when I jump the jumps or like a cheetah when I go fast through all the corners and obstacles. It’s really great fun.” Inspiration has come from her manager and mentor, Stefy Bau.  Watching motocross and other motorsport events on DStv’s SuperSport channels has been highly motivational for Tanya and essential to her forward path.. “I watch motocross races on DStv and it’s of great benefit to see how other riders are competing, especially if I can’t get to be at events myself. I get the same feeling other friends and family get when they watch their favourite soccer teams playing.” It’s not only sport that she enjoys watching. She’s a fan of fun channels like Cartoon Network or more serious ones like and eTV Africa. “He tells me he wants to race against me in motocross one day and he plans to beat me to the finish.”
Her younger sister isn’t into motocross. “Like many girls she enjoys playing with dolls, drawing and sewing clothes for her toys. My dad is a great sports lover and my mom is always keen on getting us to do our school work and making sure everything is in order.”
Looking ahead, she would love to win the women’s world motocross championship and be the first black African to win a motocross championship. ‘‘It’s been a dream of mine since I was nine years old and I know that with hard work and determination l can make this dream come true.” — MultiChoice 