 Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zwWITH his career appearing at a crossroads and at its lowest ebb, Warriors and Kaizer Chiefs forward Khama Billiat has surprised many by changing agents.  Billiat is going through a lean spell at the moment after netting only one goal and providing a single assist this term for Chiefs in all competitions.  As the highest-earning footballer in the Super Diski with a salary close to R1 million, the Zimbabwean’s poor form has been the main story both in South Africa and here at home.  Acres of space and columns in many newspapers and a lot of airtime on radio and television have been dedicated to the subject.  While a huge spotlight is currently on his struggles, Billiat then decided to terminate his relationship with football agent Mike Ngobeni of M-Sports Management.  Ngobeni is the agent that negotiated the 30-year-old’s mega-money move to Chiefs from Mamelodi Sundowns.
After parting with Ngobeni, Billiat’s choice for a new representative has also made headlines after he chose to go with Godfrey “Vokal” Bakasa as his new manager. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Bakasa is popular in the local music circles after working as manager to Zimdancehall acts Seh Calaz, Tocky Vibes as well as hip-hop star Stunner.  Although it is still unclear why Billiat dumped Ngobeni, his new manager Bakasa believes that the Warriors star is now in safe hands under his stewardship.   “What he is going through is normal and he will eventually overcome it. I’m coming in to manage and market the brand Khama as well as his football business for now. I’m one of the people he has chosen to work with and we are looking forward to the task,” he said.  “Of course, there is a lot of work to be done and it starts now. What’s important is to work with Khama in his best interests to make sure that everything will be handled correctly and professionally.  “It will be important to make sure that he is well looked after. I want to make sure that he is in good hands, and he is happy and at peace.”  Meanwhile, in an interview with Goal.com yesterday, Ngobeni said he holds no grudges against Billiat following their parting of ways.  “Khama is my boy. He’s like my younger brother. There is no bad blood between him and I. We are still in constant communication,” Ngobeni said.  “I accepted his decision and we have moved on from it. We can’t be selfish as agents. If a player says he wants to move on with someone else then let him go because who knows? He might have been promised a move to Arsenal.”