 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw PRESIDENT Emmerson Mnangagwa has sworn in the new Energy minister, Soda Zhemu and Agriculture minister Anxious Masuka, who immediately indicated that they were ready to improve the energy and agricultural sectors respectively, the Daily News reports.  Zhemu, a relatively unknown Zanu PF Member of Parliament for Muzarabani North, replaced former Energy minister Fortune Chasi, who was fired by Mnangagwa last week, while Masuka took over from the late Perrance Shiri who died recently to the lethal coronavirus (Covid-19).  Addressing journalists following the swearing in ceremony held at the State House in Harare yesterday, Masuka said his vision was to improve food security, substitute imports and increase the country’s exports.  This comes as the World Food Programme (WFP) recently warned that eight million people will be facing starvation by December 2020 in Zimbabwe.   googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “So, we will be focusing on food security, import substitution, diversified and expanded exports, value addition beneficiation, employment creation and of course improvement in rural livelihoods in pursuit of that vision.  “There is no option, people need to eat every day and we cannot continue to import what we eat.”
The new Energy minister, Zhemu, said his drive would be to ensure that there is adequate energy and power supply as the key enablers of economic development.  “When we talk about issues to do with electricity, energy and power we have to go on a process. Already the president has outlined the vision where we are looking at a point where we will have adequate and sustainable power generation.  “So, obviously we will still have to follow after what has been put forward by the president in order to achieve that vision. I know certainly people are very interested to know about issues to do with power because power and energy are key enablers towards the achievement of the vision,” Zhemu said.