 MDC ALLIANCE vice-chairperson Job Sikhala, who was arrested on Friday and accused of inciting people for the July 31 demonstration, will spend this weekend behind bars and will be back in court tomorrow.  Sikhala was not asked to plead to the allegations when he appeared before Harare magistrate Lazini Ncube yesterday. Through his lawyer, Advocate Eric Matinenga, Sikhala is challenging his placement on remand saying the charge did not disclose an offence. Matinenga told the court that he will be challenging the investigating officer to prove how the alleged remarks by Sikhala through social media constitute incitement to cause violence. He also submitted that everything that is alleged to have been done by Sikhala is constitutionally-guaranteed hence cannot be said to be illegal. The State, however, said they would not be calling the investigating officer for the application by the defence, arguing it was not yet time for him to be on the witness stand. Matinenga then indicated that he will be making an application to have the investigating officer placed on the stand.
The State alleges that between the period March 1 and August 21 in the capital, Sikhala persuaded or induced other people through communication to engage in violent demonstrations. He allegedly posted videos on various social media platforms with the message “people from Zambezi to Limpopo to Forbes Border Post to Victoria Falls 31 July 2020 should be your day. “This is the kind of war that we have. If we do not fight this war nothing will come out until we die.
“These men have oppressed the people for a long time. This time they have to kill, really kill us. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); These men have stolen our youth. We did not enjoy it at all. All the people in London are heeding the message that on the day they will besiege our embassies even those in America they will be in action on 21 and 31 July. “Those in Australia and South Africa are all saying they will be taking action. I will fight the State since I’m not easily intimidated”.