 Mugove Tafirenyika and
Jeffrey Muvundisi
STAFF WRITERS ZIMBABWE’s law enforcement agents were yesterday, Heroes Day, in full force manning roadblocks leading into Harare and Bulawayo central business districts (CBDs), sending travellers back home.  This follows announcements by MDC Alliance deputy national chairperson Job Sikhala that more protests were planned for a week — starting from yesterday.  The MDC Alliance deputy national chairperson has, however, gone into hiding after the police revealed they wanted to interview him and several other activists in connection with the abortive July 31 protest.  In Bulawayo, almost all roads leading to the CBD were manned by police and soldiers who, apart from turning people away, also warned them of the consequences of being in the city.  As a result, vehicular and human traffic in both cities’ CBDs was limited, with the security agencies only allowing uniformed forces, nurses and ambulance drivers in.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); National Police spokesperson Paul Nyathi told the Daily News yesterday there was nothing unusual about the activity as the security forces were merely enforcing the country’s lock-down measures to contain the spread of the lethal coronavirus (Covid-19).   Last month, the government unleashed the police and soldiers to stop planned protest by locking down urban centres and suburbs; a move that discouraged potential picketers from assembling.  However, the heavy presence of security details did not cow organisers of the protesters who instead called for another round of demonstrations this week.   “That will be the week of action. This time it won’t be a one-day event. It will be a week of expression against corruption and looting. This time we are also speaking against gross human rights abuses against us.”  All this comes as police have toughened their enforcement of the recently declared dusk-to- dawn curfew which bans the movement of people between 6pm and 6am.  Recently, commissioner general of police Godwin Matanga declared that law enforcement agents were determined to ensure that the measures, which are meant to prioritise the health and safety of Zimbabweans, are enforced throughout the country.  The police boss called on the public to buy food and other necessities from their nearest shopping centres “and this should be done by selected family members to curtail public gatherings.”  Matanga also warned “errant commuter omnibus operators, bottle stores owners, shebeen operators and those who may try to come up with excuses to break the curfew that arrests will be effected for the law to take its course”.