 Dakarai Mashava Features Editor mashavad@dailynews.co.zw THE Transforming Zimbabwe’s Dairy Value Chain for the Future (TranZDVC) project, which aims to address the root causes of under-performance in Zimbabwe’s dairy value chain, has identified the participation of women and youth farmers as a strategy to address succession issues. TranZDVC is a partnership between We Effect, Zimbabwe Association of Dairy Farmers (ZADF), Zimbabwe Farmers Union (ZFU) and Zimbabwe Dairy Industry Trust (ZDIT). The four participating organisations are convinced that projects in Zimbabwe’s dairy value chain will only be sustainable over the long term if women and youths participate. It further noted that despite the fact that women and youth do most of the daily chores associated with dairy farming including, feeding cows, ensuring a clean environment for them to stay healthy and productive, their participation remains largely unrecognised. A baseline and milk mapping exercise conducted by We Effect and recently validated by industry actors, established that only 23 percent of the 1935 farmers surveyed were women while the youth were just eight percent of the sample. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); According to We Effect-the lead partner of the TranZDVC project-the proportion of women given 99-year leases still remains very small while youth participation in farming in general is negligible. “A very insignificant number of young people and youths are currently participating in dairy, either as owners of enterprises or working in the sector. “Gender mainstreaming and youth participation must help to increase the number of youths and women in the dairy value chain and at the same time promote succession planning at farm and processor level,” said We Effect. As part of efforts to bridge the gender gap and to infuse young people into the dairy value chain, TranZDVC has identified a total of 120 gender champions and 120 youth champions. A female farmer based in Chipinge district in Manicaland province, who identified herself as Sibula, bemoaned the low participation of women in the dairy sector. “Previously women were not recognised as dairy farmers. Whenever there was a dairy targeted programme, women were not included. The men would just do their business and not involve us. But, after the TranZDVC Gender training programme we attended in Mutare things have changed,” said Sibula.