AT A time when he is looking for ways to salvage his stuttering career, Warriors and Kaizer Chiefs winger Khama Billiat has triggered fresh debate after appointing Godfrey “Vokal” Bakasa as his new manager. Bakasa is popular in the local musical circles after working as a manager to Zimdancehall artistes such as Seh Calaz, Tocky Vibes as well as hip-hop star Stunner leaving people to question whether he is the right person for Billiat. The 30-year-old Warriors forward did not renew his contract with Mike Ngobeni of M-Sports Management, despite playing a major role in facilitating his move to Kaizer Chiefs. Billiat’s move comes at a time when the forward is experiencing a colossal dip in form after netting only one goal and providing a single assist during this campaign. During the 1-0 defeat to Mamelodi Sundowns, Kaizer Chiefs coach Ernest Middendorp dropped the Zimbabwean to the bench and only introduced him as a late second half substitute. A football agent’s core responsibilities include negotiating contracts to achieve the best possible outcome for their client and securing lucrative endorsement and sponsorship deals. Besides taking care of the intricacies of financial issues, agents are also responsible for managing their clients’ public relations and arranging interviews. In order for an individual to qualify to be an agent, they have to be registered and pass an exam organised by the relevant football association from their home country. Speaking with the Daily News last week, Bakasa said he is the best man for the job and will do everything in his power to help revive his client’s fortunes. “Of course, there is a lot of work to be done and it starts now. What’s important is to work with Khama in his best interests to make sure that everything will be handled correctly and professionally.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); One of the leading football agents in local football George Deda believes Billiat should have looked for a more experienced manager at this crucial stage of his career. The former Ajax Cape Town player is now in the final year of his Chiefs deal which comes to an end next June. “My understanding is that you should have someone with the knowledge of the particular subject for instance if it’s something to do with law, I would engage lawyers for proper guidance. Similarly, if it’s something to do with medical issues I would look for doctors. “We will have to give them time and see how it goes, he could probably bring the best out of Khama.”
Deda, who recently worked together with fellow local agent Gibson Mahachi to take Highlanders forward Prince Dube to Tanzanian giants Azam FC, urged Zimbabwean players to work with their compatriots. “One thing, though I want to tell our local players is to learn to trust their own countrymen. I see no reason why most of our players change managers once they are in foreign leagues,” he said. “Zimbabwe has some of the best managers like myself, Mahachi and many others. We are much better than some of these football agents.” Former CAPS United forward Alois Bunjira also added his voice to the debate regarding Billiat’s partnership with Bakasa. Football analyst Martin Changachirere feels Billiat’s decision is ill-informed. “How can you take someone with a musical background to handle your football matters? It looks more like Khama is managing Vokal. Vokal needs someone, whom he can work under first as an understudy. In a way this announcement is a subtle announcement of his decline.”