 Nigel Matongorere 
SPORTS EDITOR 
matongoreren@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWE international forward Terrence Dzvukamanja showed why a number of top teams are interested in his signature after his brace in Bidvest Wits’ 3-2 loss to Mamelodi Sundowns in the Nedbank Cup semi-final on Saturday. Dzvukamanja’s future is the subject of a lot of speculation ever since Bidvest announced they have sold their Absa Premiership status to National First Division side Tshakuma Tsha Madzivhandila (TTM) in June. The Clever Boys coach Gavin Hunt and a number of players have already made their intentions clear of looking for new clubs after TTM revealed they were not able to afford their high salaries. Dzvukamanja, who has scored nine goals in 29 appearances across all competitions this season, is one of those players that have attracted the attention of rival clubs. On Saturday night at the Orlando Stadium, the 26-year-old was at his usual best as he netted twice in his club’s first game ever since the Super Diski took a break in March after the outbreak of coronavirus (Covid-19). Sundowns took the lead 10 minutes before half time when defender Ricardo Nascimento converted from 12 yards out after Wits defender Buhle Mkhwanazi fouled Motjeka Madisha inside the box. Dzvukamanja brought Wits back on level terms in the 76th minute with a well-taken solo effort after picking Madisha’s pocket near the halfway line. The Zimbabwean raced into the Sundowns box and with everyone expecting him to cross for teammate Cole Alexander, Dzvukamanja beat Sundowns goalkeeper Dennis Onyango with a rising shot that went in at the far post. Keletso Makgalwa restored the Brazilians’ lead five minutes later but Wits, and especially Dzvukamanja, were not going down without a fight. The Zimbabwe International again equalised for the Clever Boys five minutes from time when he failed to control Phathushedzo Nange’s pass on the edge of the box. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The ball fortunately rolled behind Madisha and Dzvukamanja reacted first before beating Onyango with a low shot into the back of the net. Sundowns booked their place in the final when Lyle Lakay scored with a peach of a free kick in the fifth minute of added time. However, it was Dzvukamanja’s performance which caught the eye and a number of Super Diski teams will be following his situation closely in the next few weeks in the hope of landing a quality striker. The Zimbabwean’s agent, Mike Makaab, recently admitted that the way Wits and TTM handled the situation was not fair and he is now working to find a solution. “I am a little disappointed that the players weren’t consulted prior to the sale, but we have what we have now,” Makaab told SA media.