 Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw ZIFA seems to be underestimating the impact Caf’s recent proclamation of dates for the forthcoming Afcon 2022 and Qatar World Cup 2022 qualifiers, with no sign of resumption of local football. The Warriors are now set to take on reigning African champions Algeria in back-to-back Group H qualifiers between November 9 and 17 which is just two months away. At the moment, the domestic league is inactive after the government in March banned all sporting activities in a bid to curb the spread of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. In other countries, the football associations (FAs) have worked on return to play protocols which have been approved by their governments allowing the game to resume. However, Zifa seems to be acting slow in that regard as they are yet to come up with protocols which the government can look at before allowing local football to finally return. Asked if Zifa would expedite the process to get government approval for the game to start, spokesperson Xolisani Gwesela said: “We are still consulting our affiliates and stakeholders on the safe return to football activities.” A number of local players, who would have a shot at making it in coach Zdravko Logarusic’s squad to face the Atlas Lions in November have been greatly disadvantaged by this uncertainty. Goalkeepers Simba Chinani and Talbert Shumba as well as defenders Partson Jaure, Ian Nekati and winger Phenias Bamusi were all part of the squad that took on Botswana and Zambia in the Warriors’ last competitive matches before the Covid-19 outbreak. Former Highlanders forward Prince Dube was also part of the squad but he recently signed for Tanzanian side Azam FC and is already training with his new teammates. Former Warriors and Mamelodi Sundowns winger Alois Bunjira castigated Zifa for their lack of a proper plan amidst this pandemic. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Besides the fact that the domestic league is in limbo, Zimbabwe has also been handed a stadia ban by Caf. The National Sports Stadium, Barbourfields and Rufaro were all deemed unfit to host international matches and it is not clear where the Warriors will host Algeria. Before the Covid-19 pandemic, Zimbabwe was supposed to use Orlando Stadium in Johannesburg, South Africa as their home venue. “Remember we had a June deadline to produce a report on the progress on each stadium for them to send an inspection team. So what we did is we sent it to Caf and we are still waiting for them to tell us when they will come for a re-inspection,” Gwesela said. “We understand Covid-19 has made it difficult for people to travel freely hence the delays but basically we will be guided by Caf on the way forward. We are also hoping that Caf will revise their earlier stance to make us play in a foreign land.” 