LIFESTYLE WRITER INAUGURAL Bulawayo Arts Festival held this year which featured both established and emerging artists saw outstanding performances across the board and wide reach across the world. In line with its programme for the advancement of women artists, Nhimbe Trust were pleased to note a strong representation of women during the June virtual festival; 46.5 percent of 127 performers altogether, in 22 music acts, three dance, five poetry, one fashion, three comedy acts and five theatre productions. Featured women artists included Nkwali, Michelle Moyo, Selmor Mtukudzi, Lorraine Stot backed by Mimmie Tarukwana and Lily; Thandi Dlana, Prudence Delah Dube, Sandra Ndebele, Vuyo Brown, dancers of Iyasa and Bolamba Culture Birds, actresses in Blood Tongue, The Musical by Nhimbe Trust; Agnes Ncube, Musa Sibanda, Sithabile Ndubiwa and Lady Tshawe in Vagina Monologues; young actresses from Nketa High school, models from Umceco The Show, the talented young Choice from Oxide, and Lisa Sidambe.  Feedback online was continuous, bringing people together in real time and beyond, and by the end of June the performances had reached 142,262 viewers (BAF and Bulawayo City Council viewership combined).  Dlana said: “I was very humbled to be chosen to be part of the first edition of the Bulawayo Arts Festival.  It was nice to perform for the online audience and wait for it to be viewed by the rest of the world afterwards as well.  It was a great experience for me.  Because of our passion for music and under-standing it was the first edition we were very happy to be chosen, and by the next edition we hope the festival will find stronger support.”  The young singer-songwriter of the jazz genre, Vuyo Brown said: “From the time I heard about the Bulawayo Arts Festival and that it was coming I was really excited, it felt new and fresh and colourful.  It was so cool to get to be part of the launch, the very first one, and to be counted among those artists.  It had become a thing, a lot of artists wanted to be part of it, so it was a big deal that I got to be part of it.  I was really honoured.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  I enjoyed performing online because you really have the people’s attention. In festivals and shows I’ve done before, yes, people are listening to you, but there’s so much happening around them, so the chances of them really capturing and appreciating the music -it’s not really there. Congratulations continued to pour in and among them, acclaimed theatre practitioner and Nhimbe partner Memory Kumbota said: “Congratulations Big Josh (Nyapimbi, Nhimbe Trust), always quietly setting the standards. We have successfully launched the country’s first online festival.” Jibilika Dance Festival’s Plot Mhako wrote: “Super awesome! Last night I saw great support, sharing, tagging + flawless performances. We can change our narratives from us and them to we.”