 POLICE yesterday arrested only five people for participating in demonstrations against corruption across the country and are facing charges of trying to incite violence. In a statement, police spokesperson Paul Nyathi said yesterday generally the environment was peaceful as the demonstrations, organised by opposition parties and civil society organisations, flopped. “The Zimbabwe Republic Police has arrested five people in Harare, Bulawayo and Chegutu for trying to incite the public to engage in illegal demonstrations while carrying placards written various political messages meant to cause public disorder. “Those arrested include Tsitsi Dangarembga, and a white person who were carrying placards along Borrowdale Road in Harare, Mzingaye Matthew Thaka in Bulawayo, Edward Dzeka, an MDC Alliance councillor for ward 9, Chegutu, and other suspects namely Lloyd Kashiri,41, Nkulumani Matoboto, 35 and Isheanesu Chimunyemba, 26. The three were also arrested in Chegutu. “The public is urged to continue observing peace and to report anyone who engages in any form of criminality to the police,” Nyathi said. This comes as police officers and soldiers blocked all the main roads leading to central business districts (CBDs) in different cities and towns as they feared that the demonstrations were going to turn violent. This also comes as the authorities are hunting for yesterday’s demonstration organisers who are in hiding after suspected State security agents allegedly raided their homes. Recently, western powers and human rights organisations have stepped up pressure on the government to end the authorities’ alleged brutal crackdown on dissenting voices — including a spate of abductions and torture of opposition and pro-democracy activists. The country’s jittery authorities have been sweating over the fresh anti-government protests that have been threatened by the opposition for some time, with the government claiming that the latest protest was meant to remove President Emmerson Mnangagwa and his government from power.