 Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw BOTH the United Nations (UN) and The Elders have implored President Emmerson Mnangagwa and his government to stop alleged human rights violations in the country, the Daily News reports.  The deputy spokesperson for the UN secretary-general, Farhan Haq, said on Wednesday that the global inter-governmental organisation which aims to maintain international peace and security was concerned with developments in the country. “The secretary-general has been following with concern recent developments in Zimbabwe.
“He urges the government of Zimbabwe to ensure the protection of all fundamental human rights, notably the freedom of opinion and expression and the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, in accordance with Zimbabwe’s human rights obligations.  “He also calls on all political actors and civil society to resolve issues peacefully through inclusive dialogue,” Haq said.  On its part, the Elders — a group of eminent global human rights and peace campaigners — said it was important for the government to end the alleged crackdown on opponents, and promote dialogue and reforms in the country.   “As the scale of #ZimbabweanLivesMatter shows, dialogue and reform are urgently needed,” the group said.  The Elders were in Zimbabwe in the run-up to the 2018 elections, as well as last year — to try to encourage local peace and national dialogue.  During last year’s visits, where they held meetings with both President Emmerson Mnangagwa and MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa — in a bid to engender dialogue between the two men — The Elders were represented by their chairperson and former president of Ireland, Mary Robinson, as well as her deputy, Graça Machel. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  They also met with civil society leaders and the Church.   On her part, Robinson urged political parties and security forces to commit to abide by the country’s Constitution, the rule of law, freedom of speech and the protection of human rights.   “Today that optimism has gone amid a worsening economic crisis, entrenched political polarisation and a culture of fear, paranoia and State violence.  “Yet, I have been heartened by hearing from courageous women and church leaders from across society who are meeting to nurture dialogue and reimagine their country’s future.  “They offer an example that all Zimbabweans should follow,” Robinson said then.