PREACHER and musician Tapiwa Freddy says videos are a way through which a message can reach a wide audience. His comments come as he releases his latest eight track album Area 1 which is accompanied by four videos. Due to the current coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown, the album was launched in style, on four radio stations on Thursday.
Freddy said the album is for everyone, believers and non-believers. “This is a complete package, gospel music on a different path. We employed different approaches to spice up the album; we also have jiti in there and it is something everyone can listen to.” The preacher had anticipated a massive album launch in the Harare Gardens but could not proceed due to a ban on public gatherings due to Covid-19. “Covid-19 is real and we don’t know when it will end so we had to give people the music. “We were on various radio stations and social media pages to make sure that all our followers got the music.” The offering features the title track Area 1 and comprise other songs such as Talk talk, Shamwari yehupenyu, Zvakwana, Rest In Peace (R.I.P), Ndirikurwadziwa, Nguva yakwana and Gather around. The videos that have been released include Rest In Peace (R.I.P), Ndirikurwadziwa, Talk Talk and Zvakwana all which have captured the attention of many. On R.I.P pictures of the preacher in a coffin sent tongues wagging earlier as they circulated first before the video hit the social media platforms.
Ndirikurwadziwa, a video depicting the human nature of the popular preacher, was dropped after his church structure in Glen View was destroyed by council. He weeps like a child as the development caught him unaware and also at a time he had replenished the church’s roof with new designer roofing sheets. The Talk Talk video features comedians among them the notorious Kapfupi- Fred Manjalima and the famous Mabla 10. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “Four videos are already out and more will be coming. This is a way of capturing the attention of many.
“The more the people talk, the more the message is spread,” Freddy told the Daily News on Sunday. The song Area 1 has captured the attention of many, coming after dancehall star Winky D dropped his own titled Area 51.
“In that song the message is that there is one problem area in one’s life; in marriages, a cell phone can be a problem area.”