ASSISTANT EDITORTHE arrest on Friday of Tsitsi Dangarembga, pictured, an award-winning Zimbabwean author and Booker Prize nominee, has been condemned by fellow artists and social commentators.  Dangarembga was on Saturday released on bail after her arrest during an anti-government demonstration.
She was ordered to return to court on September 18.  Dangarembga was charged with incitement to commit violence and breaching coronavirus regulations after staging a demonstration in the capital on Friday, the day of the planned protests.  The Cambridge-educated author is the only Zimbabwean woman writer to win the Commonwealth Writers’ Prize and has often been praised for speaking out on women’s issues. In recent weeks she has been holding solo protests against abduction of activists and corruption in government.  Her 1988 novel Nervous Conditions was a world masterpiece and her Friday arrest came days after her latest novel, This Mournable Body, entered the long list for the Booker Prize.  In a statement, police confirmed she had been arrested “for trying to incite the public to engage in illegal demonstrations while carrying placards with various political messages meant to cause public disorder.”
Among several others arrested Friday was Fadzayi Mahere, a lawyer and spokeswoman for the main opposition, the Movement for Democratic Change-Alliance.   Social commentator Vivienne Marara said this was indeed a sad development. “As a writer, Tsitsi understands the importance of freedom of expression and true to form she chose to express herself on the streets. Whereas we are presently in a pandemic which has seen a number of countries enacting lockdown measures, this should however not negate against the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms by citizens.   Choreographer and music teacher Clayton Ndlovu said “first all, we can’t be all be cowards! There are those among us who will always sacrifice themselves to be in the frontline trying to address issues that bother everyone.   “Our constitution is very clear about our human rights and for one to be arrested for a solo peaceful demonstration even during lockdown is a violation of those rights as enshrined on our Constitution.  “How else do we as Zimbabwe citizens lawfully engage in peaceful dialogue with the government other than staging a peaceful demonstration which tries to address issues that affect us as citizens of Zimbabwe?  “So Tsitsi and others have tried to have a dialogue that focuses on issues of corruption. Instead of arresting those who are whistle blowing on corruption why not arrest those who are corrupt in the first place?”  Ndlovu added that the speed at which the government responds to individuals who call it out would have been commendable if the same speed was used to respond to corrupt individuals who have brought down the country.  Analyst Gladys Hlatywayo said government is on a self-destructive route. “In a democratic society, citizen agency is encouraged and nurtured. It’s only in autocratic regimes like ours where citizens are arrested for exercising their democratic and constitutional rights.  “Section 59 of the Constitution provides for citizens’ right to demonstrate and petition.
“Tsitsi, like the rest of the people who were arrested countrywide was exercising that right and she did so in a peaceful way and in compliance with Covid-19 regulations. If there is one thing that July 31 demonstrated, it is the fact that Mnangagwa’s regime is not a ‘new dispensation’ but a fascist regime that has no respect for human rights.  “Since August 2018, citizens have been targeted for expressing their dissatisfaction with the high levels of corruption, the deteriorating socio-economic standards and increase in human rights among a host of manifestations of the political crisis in Zimbabwe.”  Hlatywayo added that Dangarembga’s arrest is a demonstration that no one is safe in Zimbabwe.  “They go after anyone who dares to question the governance crisis. They would rather loot undisturbed whilst citizens die in hospitals and many sleep on empty stomachs.”  