Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw THE Premier Soccer League (PSL) chief executive Kenny Ndebele says there is need for football stakeholders to be proactive and ensure clubs resume training immediately so that they will be in shape when football eventually resumes. Zifa appears to be dithering on engaging the government to submit a proposal on how football can start in the wake of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Since March, the government has postponed all sporting activities in a bid to curb the spread of the virus.
While other low risk sporting disciplines have been allowed to resume light activities, football and other full-contact codes are yet to get the green light from health authorities. With the slim hope of local football returning this year increasingly evaporating with each passing day, other neighbouring leagues have worked closely with their governments to ensure a safe return for the game.
It is against this background though that Ndebele feels the PSL and the Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) cannot keep folding their hands anymore. “Whatever is possible has to be done. We need to start preparing immediately and whenever we get the opportunity to be cleared we start playing,” Ndebele told the Daily News yesterday. “We can’t employ a wait and see strategy; we need to pursue for clearance so that clubs can at least start training.”
Another pressing issue is that the Warriors are set to resume their 2022 Afcon Group H qualifying campaign with back-to-back matches against reigning African champions Algeria between November 9 and 17. Warriors coach, Zdravko “Loga” Logarusic and his team will then complete their campaign with matches against Zambia and Botswana between March 20 and 31 next year.
Logarusic has already said he will not consider local players for the Algeria matches as long as the PSL is not up and running.
“If Caf are saying qualifiers will be played in November, it’s important that we push for clearance to start training within the WHO protocols,” Ndebele said.  “There are a lot of things that we need to factor in here. Chances are that foreign-based players might not be released according to latest Fifa communication because of the coronavirus. What will we do then? This is why it’s important for PSL players to start training. “We provide players for the national team and if the fixtures are in November and we are folding our hands what are we doing really?
“We cannot sit and wait for authorities to grant clearance then we start preparations. Look at the tourism sector, they resumed operations and schools are currently pushing to start and it’s the same thing that we should be doing in football at the moment.
“We need to be proactive and push for the clearance, it’s important for us. We will not be fined for submitting a proposal. Even if we say we can’t play football this year but the important thing is that even next year we will still need to prepare.”  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Zifa had previously indicated that they would be guided by the document from the medicine committee on August 8 but since then, they have kept developments a secret. “The sports medicine committee came up with a document to guide and the assumption is that it was submitted to the government for approval. It’s only us who can push for the start of football,” Ndebele said. “Other countries are busy holding workshops on how to play in the current situation. It is the same with us we should be doing the same thing for instance we need to get the position on stadia now. “We can rectify other issues that have been raised by instance body now so that when we are eventually cleared to start we don’t start from zero. We have to quickly start the process. We must not look at the dates but the process. “We may not have football this year but we need players to start training and put other things in order. We cannot wait for someone from somewhere to give us the go ahead. What we are doing now is to engage stakeholders.
“What might not start is the competition but other things must be done and put in place.”