 HEALTH experts said yesterday that Zimbabwe was yet to flatten the coronavirus curve despite recording reduced new infections in the past week, the Daily News on Sunday reports.  This comes as the number of new recorded infections has not gone beyond the average of 100 a day since a week ago.  It also comes as the country now has more than 5 000 positive cases of coronavirus, including 128 deaths.
Health experts who spoke to the Daily News on Sunday yesterday said there was need for Zimbabweans not to relax, because the country was not yet out of danger on the Covid-19 front.  The secretary-general of the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA), Arron Musara, said the nation had to remain focused on combating the disease.   “High temperatures might have a bearing, but so far we are not sure. We must not be complacent and we need to remain vigilant because Covid-19 is still there and the number of positive cases can increase. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “Everyone must continue to follow set guidelines so that we can win our war against Covid-19,” he added.
The president of the Zimbabwe Nurses Association (Zina), Enock Dongo, also warned that the country was yet to reach the virus peak.   “We need to be cautious and follow the set guidelines, like maintaining social distancing. We are not out of danger. We are not yet to get to the peak, and as such we are likely to see cases going up.  “Many people are not going for tests because most of them are recovering at home. There is a need to guard against complacency. It’s not yet over because the disease is in our communities,” Dongo said.  This comes after the SHDA recently wrote a letter to the government saying there was a need for authorities to look anew at Covid-19 testing, as rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) often give false negative results.  “Reagents and consumables are an expensive and finite resource. Therefore, Covid-19 testing cannot be business as usual, whether in the public or private sector.  “Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) should no longer be allowed for diagnosis, both in public and private labs.
“The WHO (World Health Organisation) and Africa CDC (Centres for Disease Control and Prevention) only recommend these tests for use in public health surveillance, not diagnosis of individual patients.  “The high false negative rate may lead to delayed presentation at a health facility and poorer outcomes consequently,” the senior doctors said.
“We need a national conversation to guide who should be tested. In our view, it is a waste of resources to test everyone.   “Testing at companies must be on clinical grounds. Random testing of an entire workforce on the basis of one positive co-worker without meeting any definition of contact status is clogging the system and for little reward,” the doctors added.