Blessing Masakadza
STAFF WRITER
masakadzab@dailynews.co.zwHARARE magistrate Lazini Ncube yesterday threw out MDC Alliance vice chairperson Job ‘‘Wiwa’’ Sikhala’s application for refusal of placement on remand following his dramatic arrest last Friday in Tynwald North on allegations of inciting public violence.  Dismissing the application, Ncube said the firebrand politician’s utterances calling for the foiled July 31 protest showed that he was combative and prepared to go to extremes such as war to achieve his objective.  The magistrate said there was reasonable suspicion that Sikhala had committed the offence and placed him on remand in custody.  He is expected to make a bail application before Ncube today.
Sikhala is alleged to have made various utterances through social media.  He  allegedly said: “People from Zambezi to Limpopo to Forbes Border Post to Victoria Falls 31 July 2020 should be your day.  “This is the kind of war that we have. If we do not fight this war nothing will come out until we die. These men have oppressed the people for a long time. This time they have to kill, really kill us. These men have stolen our youth.”  In court, Sikhala argued that his utterances can all be interpreted as political banter synonymous with politicians and also guaranteed in the national Constitution.  But the magistrate ruled the alleged utterances should be interpreted as the State alleges that he intended to incite violence, adding Sikhala had also canvassed people in other countries to participate.  He said Sikhala was not disputing he uttered the alleged words, but argued it was his right to say them as free expression as guaranteed in the laws of land.  The magistrate dismissed the assertion, averring rights were not absolute and have limitations.
Following the dismissal of Sikhala’s application, State counsel Garudzo Ziyaduma said they were opposed to Sikhala being granted bail.  One of Sikhala lawyers, Harrison Nkomo then made an application to have the officer in charge at Chikurubi Maximum Security Prison directed to give the politician access to his medication, beverages and food, saying they do not have confidence in what is offered at the prison after the complaints he raised on his initial appearance.  The State did not oppose the application and also told the court they will be submitting a report on their investigation on the alleged death threats made to Sikhala at the prison. 