 OPINION AND ANALYSIS by Bruce Mutsvairo  EXACTLY four years ago, in an opinion piece run by The Guardian, I argued that social media activists in Zimbabwe faced an uphill struggle finding momentum to steer themselves towards the path of democratisation.
My position hasn’t changed. On the ground in Zimbabwe, plenty has changed though. Emmerson Mnangagwa is now the president, long-criticised draconian laws, including Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (Aippa), have either been repealed or remain under parliamentary review, more citizens are accessing digital platforms and in comparison to the late former President Robert Mugabe era, digital dissent has largely been tolerated. But critics say the government fell off the carousal of progress when opposition leader Jacob Ngarivhume and other activists were recently arrested. Last year, access to social media platforms was blocked amid government denials of digital interference while anti-government digital activists have previously faced treason charges. And as educators and students across the world are discovering that online-based teaching is a great alternative during the ongoing global Covid-19 pandemic, it, however, cannot replace face-to-face teaching. All governments have ways to protect their interests. By arresting these campaigners, the Zimbabwean government wants to remind everyone that it’s them, who is still in charge. Not social media and not even these activists. While arresting Ngarivhume and others is likely to scare off investors, some Zanu PF hardliners have already given up engaging with the international community. They don’t even care what the international community says. Some don’t even know what ‘international community’ means anyway. They want to protect their interests. That’s all. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Digital activism has the potential to change African politics, but we should also know that pro-government campaigners and secret agents have also been diving into the deep waters of the web along with citizens. Whenever they feel threatened they will act. Zimbabweans rarely agree on anything. So what needs to happen before the Zimbabwean lion can roar again? My take isn’t the most popular one. It is certainly not what anyone opposed to Zanu PF wants to hear — engage them. Zanu PF is part of Zimbabwe’s problem, but it is also part of the solution. They simply cannot be wished away. Digital activism will shake them, but removing them from power is a different ball game. That is the harsh reality. Worse still, many Zimbabweans can’t be bothered anyway. They prefer social media gossip or comedy to digitally-supported political protests. Besides, it’s often those in the Diaspora urging friends and families back home to risk their lives by taking to the streets. Mutsvairo is a Professor of Journalism at Auburn University in the United States. A social media research expert, he has published eight books including Digital Activism in the Social Media Era: Critical Reflections on Emerging Trends in sub-Saharan Africa. A shorter version of this article was published in The Mail and Guardian’s Continent. He can be contacted via bruce.mutsvairo@auburn.edu