 Nigel Matongorere SPORTS EDITOR matongoreren@dailynews.co.zw  WHILE Warriors forward Khama Billiat celebrated his 30th birthday yesterday, South African media continued with their blitz against the under-fire Kaizer Chiefs forward. Billiat, is yet to reach the same levels which made him a superstar in the Super Diski. The Warriors star has only scored once for the Soweto giants ever since his move from Mamelodi Sundowns in June 2018. As one of the highest paid players in the Super Diski with a salary close to R1 million per month, Billiat’s performances and goal return for the Phefeni Glamour Boys have attracted a lot of criticism from SA media and pundits alike. Although, Chiefs are on the verge of ending their five-year drought as they hurtle towards a 13th league title, all the focus and headlines are on Billiat. At the weekend, the Soweto giants had to come from two goals down before winning 3-2 against Polokwane City at Loftus Versfeld. Former Warriors captain Willard Katsande got Chiefs back in the game before Anthony Akumu equalised for the Soweto giants. Serbian forward Samir Nurkovic scored the winner in a dramatic turnaround by Chiefs which left them six points clear of second-placed Sundowns. In an article titled Akumu and Billiat level on Chiefs goals , Kick Off continued with their anti-Billiat campaign. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Recently, the Kick Off website carried an interview with former Chiefs midfielder Jabulani Mendu, who said the club got the wrong Billiat from Sundowns. Mendu was not pleased with the Zimbabwean’s performance after Chiefs drew 1-1 with Bidwest Wits when the Super Diski returned after a five-month Covid-19-induced break last week. “It’s hurting to talk about Khama. I think he’s giving Kaizer Chiefs a raw deal. That’s all I can say. I think his heart is not there. I’m sorry.” Lizo Mjempu, who played with Billiat at Ajax Cape Town, also recently weighed in on the debate during a recent interview with Soccer Laduma. “I think the Khama of Sundowns and the one for Chiefs are different. At Sundowns there were ball players — the likes of (Sibusiso) Vilakazi and (Keagan) Dolly. There were good players around him. There wasn’t too much pressure on him like it has been at Chiefs, and I am saying there are no good players at Chiefs,” Mjempu said.