 SINCE the foiled July 31 protest by opposition parties and civic society organisations, the political situation is increasingly becoming tense, bringing the country back in the international spotlight for the wrong reasons. The protest against corruption and the tanking economy was thwarted by the heavy deployment of security forces across the country under the guise of enforcing the national coronavirus lockdown. Allegations abound that before and after July 31, there has been increased violations of human rights, among them, torture and abductions, prompting a world-wide social media campaign against President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s government under the hashtag ZimbabweanLivesMatter. South African President Cyril Ramaphosa responded to the alleged human rights violations by appointed special envoys who flew into Harare last week and met Mnangagwa in a bid to find solutions to the country’s political and economic crises. Strangely, the Zimbabwe government is adamant that there is no crisis in the country. It profusely and vehemently insists allegations of human rights violations are conjured up by foreign-sponsored opposition and civil society organisations for the purpose of effecting an illegal regime change. We have noticed with trepidation government and the ruling Zanu PF spin doctors trying, unconvincingly though, to dismiss allegations of human rights abuses and the naked truth that Zimbabwe has serious political and economic crises, which, unfortunately, are now palpable. Blaming United States and European Union sanctions and the alleged captured opposition doesn’t wash any longer. The sooner we debunk that fatigued theory the better. It is time for Mnangagwa and his blundering government to confront the truth and deal with it. No amount of name calling and tomfoolery would end the two evil crises confronting our homeland The government has to swallow its pride and admit the country is in a hopeless mess and in need of urgent help, not only to guarantee its stay in power, but to save the nation from plunging into civil strife. The situation in the country has reached boiling point. The majority of people are wallowing in poverty and have lost faith in the government because of the obtaining economic situation that has made life unbearable. The only way out is to accept inclusive dialogue, especially internally meditated and facilitated. But we also must embrace efforts by neighbours to assist in finding solutions to our two-decade long
crises. That the region’s economic powerhouse is prepared to assist in that regard is welcome and should never be frowned upon by Harare. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Without an inclusive dialogue, the country is headed for implosion and that must never be countenanced.