INTERESTING views continue to come from the local bodybuilding community on who the greatest open male bodybuilder of all time is? The first instalment has seen a tussle among six-time Mr Zimbabwe Innocent Choga, George Takundwa who won the nationals for four straight years and Bible Mhizha who was a light heavyweight mainstay winning the All Africa Championships in 1992 as well as being the best placed Zimbabwean to date at an IFBB World championships. Sports marketing expert and bodybuilder Munashe Mutandirotya who is based in the United Arab Emirates said it is a tough question and many factors have to be considered in naming the most incredible hulk. “Many bodybuilders come to mind. Bodybuilding is very subjective so this question may never truly be answered unanimously. Based on the genotype of an individual, the body takes on what is referred to as a phenotype. Genotype is the genetic makeup of an individual. Phenotype is simply a set of characteristics observable based on the interaction between the genotype and the environment. “As far as overall national titles are concerned, the legendary Choga holds a record six titles. In this regard, he is the greatest. There’s no question that he carried a superior physique during his reign. ‘‘We’ve had many other bodybuilders who’ve not necessarily won as many overall national titles as Choga, but have built physiques that potentially surpassed the package Choga brought to the stage. ‘‘Then we have the legends Grant Henderson and Mhizha who made an impact locally but seem to have made a greater impact beyond the Zimbabwe borders. In terms of physique development, these two potentially set a higher standard. ‘‘If it were possible to compare Henderson, Mhizha, Choga and Marume at their very peak, purely to determine physical muscular development without considering any other factors, we would probably get an outright winner. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); That is the nature of bodybuilding, unless compared under the same stage lights and at the same time…it’s impossible to conclude based on virtual comparisons. ‘‘In recent years, bodybuilding has changed considerably, at least in terms of conditioning. I personally feel the newer generation athletes such as Champion Chienderamwano and Paul Goredema potentially edged the masters. One thing to note is that the playing field is not even…. new generation athletes are training and competing under the hardest circumstances and they seem to have shorter competitive careers. ‘‘In my opinion, three-time Mr Zimbabwe Chienderamwano could have easily matched the title run of the legendary Marume and even challenged Choga’s record had he competed for longer. ‘‘With that said though, and in all fairness, I believe Choga’s name will come up every single time this discussion is held, therefore, he has more going for him than any other bodybuilder and is the most deserving to be labelled ‘the greatest Zimbabwean male open bodybuilder of all time.’” Seasoned judge Alexio Mangwiro said Choga is the undisputed Zimbabwe bodybuilding great. “I think for me it would be Innocent Choga because he was six times Mr Zimbabwe,” he said.
Former national junior champion and veteran judge Daniel Desouza said “I give it to Choga he won Mr Zim six times. That’s a fact. Mhizha did well internationally.”
Sam Mgubazi former bodybuilder said Choga is the greatest of them all. “The sport of bodybuilding in Zimbabwe has produced some of the most incredible, awe-inspiring physiques that the country has ever seen. “Yet even in the NFZBBF Open Nationals, a show that is quite literally a league of extraordinary musclemen showcasing their ground-breaking physiques with unprecedented combinations of leanness and muscular definition, the names Takundwa, Mhizha, Marume, Munyikwa, Chienderamwano, Gobey etc rise above the crowd as true pillars of greatness that will stand the test of time. To single out an individual from all these great champs as the best of them all is really a mammoth task as these champions were all great, for that reason I will do the selection based on numbers,” Mgubazi said. ‘‘The man who managed to clinch the coveted NFZBBF Nationals Title more times than the others is non-other than Innocent Choga who successfully racked up an impressive six Open Nationals titles throughout his competitive career. ‘‘In terms of Choga’s flawless competing physique, it was everything bodybuilding represents, with a perfect combination of size, muscular definition, proportion, symmetry and state-of-the-art posing skills. In a line-up of all the Zimbabwean bodybuilders across the eras, I’m confident Choga would take the title of the greatest bodybuilder of all time.” Karate Shihan Tawanda Mufundisi said Mhizha had a “bible” frame. Local bodybuilding “encyclopedia” Mukbul Ahmed Mukadam brought a different dimension as he took this publication through a bodybuilding sermon first before revealing his choice. “We have past bodybuilders from 1980, from Independence we have bodybuilders from pre-independence and we have current bodybuilders. Since Independence the sport of bodybuilding globally and in Zimbabwe has evolved. Zimbabwe perhaps has evolved at a greater pace than the rest of the world mainly because of the economic climate. And this evolution in bodybuilding has brought about changes in the sport and the main change is the use or the misuse of drugs in sport,” Mukadam said. “Current, contemporary, retro bodybuilders often choose enhancement drugs known as steroids or in Shona zvavanoti zvekubaya (injections). And obviously this gives them an advantage over the bodybuilders of 1980 and early 1990s who were fortunate enough not to have access to these dangerous drugs. I personally do not support the use of any type of steroids or enhancement products in all sport and especially in bodybuilding. “Bodybuilding and sport is intended to increase one’s life, to improve one’s health and to give us longevity so that we may reach 80 years or 90 years old and never know what blood pressure is or diabetes is or what arthritis is. And once we have reached 80 and 90 years old we must then be teachers and examples and role models to the up and coming new generations of bodybuilders.” Makadam said his choice will be influenced by an individual who resorted to natural remedies throughout his career as opposed to enhancement drugs. He said a bodybuilder is not determined by the quality of frame he brings on stage on the day of the contest alone. “Often when people are asked who is the greatest bodybuilder, the first image that comes to mind is of the monya (bodybuilder) on stage in his posing trunk posing and showing his muscle but that doesn’t end there. “That’s not the yardstick for the measurement of a great bodybuilder. The day a bodybuilder looks on the night of competition on stage is not the yardstick of the overall athlete he should be. The yardstick is consistency. How many years has that person trained? Education, to what extent has that person gone to teach himself about nutrition, about proper training methods, about bio mechanics and medicine,” Mukadam added. “Another factor that I would want to consider in choosing an all-time great is patriotism. Which athlete has chosen to live in Zimbabwe and go through the hardships that we all go through and still become fit and qualified enough to get on stage.. “Many athletes have chosen to leave Zimbabwe and live outside of Zimbabwe and come back once or twice a year for competitions. “Again I have no problems with this. These are their choices and they may have made these choices for whatever reasons but they do have some advantage because by living out of the country they have access to cheaper supplements, perhaps more comfortable gyms, perhaps more comfortable modes of transport. “So it will be difficult or unfair to evaluate or compare such a person with a backyard athlete. They are many backyard athletes who have to work up at 3 or 4am, stand in a queue for a kombi whether it’s raining or hot or cold. Others only have a bicycle as mode of transport yet in spite of that they train every day of the year and they have done so for more than 10 years. All of the notable athletes deserving the title you ask about have all trained for a minimum of 10 years some of them for as much as 20 years.” He reiterates that Rushika is his all-time great bodybuilder. Marume, four-time Mr Zimbabwe and six- time Mr Ironman said Takundwa is the best of all time. 
Former Ironman Zimbabwe champion Tendai Chaipa also opined Takundwa was the best. “I would like to say Takundwa is my first choice followed by Choga and Munyoro. You cannot compare old school and current athletes because yesteryear athletes were passionate about the sport and hard work- driven where’s today’s ones are all about money. Every time there’s no sponsorship you will never see top athletes competing,” said Chaipa.