 OPINION by BLACK EDWARD  My late father — may his soul rest in peace — used to say “pay no heed to a politician talking about a rival party”. Well, no one can argue with these words of wisdom, politicians do have an inherent disposition or is it political ‘tact’ of only speaking one language — that of attacking the other party. Had my father been alive today I wonder if he would have stuck to his quotable quote after reading some comments made by the former Speaker of Parliament and now president of the opposition United Movement for Devolution, Lovemore Moyo. Turning 40 in power implies transformation. The word “turning” indicates changing from being immature to being an adult — metamorphosis. It also means the party should be turning the lives of citizens from a poor lifestyle to a great lifestyle. One would want to think that being in a position of full authority for four decades, the ruling party must now be a “mature adult” and should be leading by example. With all these years in power, citizens expected the ruling party to be delivering quality services and providing all Zimbabweans with the best time of their life. But, ironically the citizens are battered and bruised from a prolonged encounter with corruption, incompetence, mismanagement and half-baked policies. Zimbabwe’s worsening political and economic crises recently attracted international attention yet again to the extent that South African president Cyril Ramaphosa has seen it fit to “intervene” — following the government’s alleged breach of human rights in the country during last month’s foiled protests. The crises have left ordinary Zimbabweans with heavy burdens to carry. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Four decades after liberation from British rule, which have seen many years of the late former president Robert Mugabe’s repression and now the “new dispensation”, a growing number of Zimbabweans are rapidly losing faith in the system. Moyo told the Daily News that it was sad that since independence, the Zanu PF leadership has consistently worked hard to divide and destabilise the country in all spheres of life. He added that instead of promoting unity, social cohesion and economic prosperity, Zanu PF chose to promote war and tribal hatred… Although having suffered so much for so long, many desperate Zimbabweans are still optimistic as they continue to soldier on.  OPINION BLACK
EDWARD