 Mugove Tafirenyika SENIOR STAFF WRITER tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zw  EDUCATORS have warned government against going ahead with plans for students to sit for the November and December public examinations this year despite learners having only attended school for just three months as this compromises the quality of the country’s education system. This comes as the government recently deferred the reopening of schools that were closed in March this year in efforts to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. As of Tuesday the virus had infected 5 378 people and killed 141. Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa told a post-Cabinet press briefing on Tuesday that the government had decided to proceed with its preparations for the reopening of schools for final examination classes. “The developed and approved guidelines that were put in place for the June 2020 examinations will be used for the holding of the final examinations in November and December,” Mutsvangwa said. Reacting to the announcement, Progressive Teachers Union Zimbabwe (PTUZ) president Takavafira Zhou said the government was shooting itself in the foot, describing the move as “at best a fantasy and at worst a fabrication of reality”. Examinations worldwide, Zhou said, were not an event, but a process which must include preparing students adequately and guaranteeing, in the face of Covid-19, the health and safety of pupils and ancillary staff, as well as the welfare of teachers. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He called on the government to reflect and properly plan after wide consultations with relevant stakeholders. “No amount of command can ever triumph over a professional approach.  Indeed teachers are more than ready to open schools any day and see their students learning, let alone writing examinations. “But that must certainly be done in a professional way and without compromising teachers’ health, safety and welfare. The welfare of teachers must be addressed before opening of schools leading to the restoration of their purchasing power parity.” Their rural counterparts, the Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (Artuz), accused the government of forcing examinations down the stakeholders’ throats. They proposed May 2021 as an alternative date to open schools after fixing outstanding challenges, including educators’ salaries.