SPEAKING in hushed tones, 80-year-old Frank Chiundura (not his real name) says he has only God to thank for surviving nature’s incessant troubles. He has seen it all, from economic woes to drought, floods and cholera. “I am the last man standing,” Chiundura said apprehensively, feigning bravado. While having escaped all these life-threatening experiences, Chiundura is now on the edge once again following an outbreak of coronavirus, a global pandemic that has claimed the lives of over 20 000 people across the world. “My life is now in God’s hands,” Chiundura said tersely. Coronavirus, which attacks the respiratory system and makes elderly people and those with underlying health conditions more susceptible to the disease, has brought chills down Chiundura’s spine. Chiundura, a retired teacher who now lives at his house in Harare’s Glen View high density suburb, spends most of his retirement time with his grandchildren, his wife and youngest son. However, reports of deaths in Italy, Spain, United Kingdom, United States and China as well as that of broadcaster Zororo Makamba last week have given Chiundura sleepless nights. “I have buried a number of my relatives and the reality that this disease may result in my own death makes me even more sad. Having seen it all, I would say, it’s time to meet my maker, but it’s not easy waking up and thinking you might not live to see another day,” he said, tears trickling down his cheeks. His fears are a mirror of the Zimbabwean society’s after going through successive crises. While battling the economy on one hand, Zimbabweans have had to deal with a number of other challenges since the turn of the millennium. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Since the year 2000, Zimbabwe has been battling with economic sanctions imposed by the West, which have in a way contributed to the country’s current situation. The economic problems have also been made worse by the toxic political environment, which has piled more pressure on the suffering people. Even though Zimbabwe has enjoyed pockets of success, these have been washed down the drain by a number of problems. Political analyst Admire Mare told the Daily News on Sunday that it seemed whenever Zimbabwe thought it was about to recover, “something external or internal throws spanners into the works”. “We have witnessed a chain of natural and man-made disasters like the cholera, Cyclone Idai and now the coronavirus, which have stretched meagre resources, but also have diverted financial and human resources from fixing the economy. It will take a lot of financial wherewithal and implementation capacity to unlock this unfortunate logjam of man-made and natural disasters while remaining focused on economic recovery,” Mare said. Between 2008 and this year, Zimbabwe has gone through a number of challenges. In 2008, several people died of cholera. During the cholera epidemic, 98 585 cases were recorded while 4 287 died during the time. This was one of the largest and deadliest epidemics in the history of Zimbabwe. The challenges were worsened by water shortages, which forced international organisations to assist by drilling boreholes in high-density suburbs. Ten years down the line, the country was hit by another cholera epidemic, which killed over 40 people across the country. During the time, the government banned public gatherings, declared a state of emergency, leading to the World Health Organisation (WHO) and other civil society organisations chipping in with critical assistance. As if this was not enough, Zimbabwe was once again hit by another massive problem last year, when thousands of people were displaced from their homes while hundreds others died after floods hit Manicaland Province. Cyclone Idai, which also hit Mozambique and some parts of Malawi, left a remarkable trail of destruction, which the government is still struggling to deal with. Bridges, roads, houses and infrastructure were destroyed, leaving thousands of families in dire need of assistance. These challenges also spilled into the 2019-2020 rainy season, where villagers were still appealing for help, while living in tents. The country’s problems were made worse by the El-Nino induced drought during the 2018-2019 farming season. The drought left millions in dire need of food assistance. According to the United Nations (UN), more than five million people in Zimbabwe, which is a third of the country’s population, are in urgent need of food. While still trying to make sense of these problems, Zimbabwe was this year hit by the coronavirus, a global disease that has left the country living in fear. Coronavirus, which originated in Wuhan Province in China, has been ravaging a number of countries, leaving a trail of death and sorrow. According to political analyst Rashweat Mukundu, the country’s problems are a result of an array of factors. “The discourse that Zimbabwe does not want to engage in is that in many respects, we have elements of a failed state in the sense that we have rules and regulations and a Constitution that is respected only to the extent that it only serves the interests of those in power. “The moment obligations are placed on those with power to act on improving the livelihoods of the people, then we see them coming up with excuses and openly violating the laws or defying either court rulings and defying the constitution itself. So, the capacity of a country like Zimbabwe to manage crisis situations is very limited because institutions are weak, issues of accountability and transparency are ignored,” Mukundu said. He said Zimbabwe was a semi-failed State, regardless of how those in power try to keep appearances. “So we need to strengthen the capacity of the state and its institutions to protect citizens and to provide infrastructure that safeguards lives and the economy. Right now that is difficult because we have been in a protracted political crisis that those in power do not see, nor have solutions on how to resolve it,” he said. Another analyst Maxwell Saungweme said it will take time for the country to recover from the current challenges. “We will never recover from these unless we deal with the long-standing governance crisis that has also sustained the economic crisis. Unlike other countries that will recover from Covid-19 crisis, Zimbabwe will never recover as this comes as a further shock to a country already in ICU in terms of governance and economics. Countries that will recover from this are those with a clean bill of health, governance and economics. Unfortunately we are in the ICU regarding these,” he said.