©️ ALTHOUGH the deadly coronavirus has cast a shadow on Zimbabwe — a country with a rickety healthcare system — the fight could be hard and gruelling considering that a large number of Zimbabweans live from hand to mouth, making a living in the informal sector. On Monday, President Emmerson Mnangagwa announced stringent measures to minimise the risk and possible impact of coronavirus, which included reducing the number of people who could publicly congregate to 50 and banning clubbing and recreational activities. However, he could not ban the pulsating informal sector where more than 90 percent of the economically active populace hustle for a living. But from the bustling Mupedzanhamo market, Harare, where people sell second-hand clothes illegally imported from Mozambique, to the hive of activity at Sakubva market in Mutare, where Zimbabwe’s economy is being driven and households sustained, a shutdown could spell doom. At Mupedzanhamo market in Mbare, a sweating heavyset woman sits behind a heap of second-hand clothes. She wets her chubby fingers to count a wad of dirty Zimbabwe dollars notes.
Even under the sullen shadow of the highly contagious coronavirus, she seemingly has no care. Most Zimbabweans use public transport where social distancing is hardly enforceable and the tale of the Mupedzanhamo trader is shared by thousands of other Zimbabweans who live from hand to mouth and use public transport. They all cannot afford to fold their arms even when the threat of coronavirus, which claimed a prominent journalist Zororo Makamba on Monday, hangs over their heads. An association of informal workers, the Vendors Initiative for Social and Economic Transformation (Viset) said the government has to cushion those who live on the economic margins during such trying times. “Viset calls upon the Zimbabwean government to ensure that comprehensive support schemes for the vulnerable are put in place. The majority of our members literally survive hand to mouth, therefore, all coronavirus containment measures and restrictions that hinder our ability to eke out a living, must be supported by an inclusive and comprehensive financial or material support to the vulnerable of our society, including Informal traders and street vendors. We further call upon the authorities to ensure that these measures be enforced in an orderly and peaceful manner. “We remain committed to work with all the relevant stakeholders in ensuring that we collectively limit the further spread of this deadly virus. Furthermore, if there is going to be any quasi or full blown lockdown, we do not expect this to be more than two weeks. “Our members simply can’t afford to stay at home for such a long time. Local authorities should also ensure that there is a programme to disinfect all the markets immediately after close of business every day so that informal traders can use the same spaces without causing the spread of the virus,” said Viset executive director Samuel Mangoma. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); So far, coronavirus has killed more than 20 000 people worldwide. There is no cure and the best prevention is to stay at home, but for a country that ticks on the labour of the informal market, staying at home is not really an option. Economists John Robertson said Zimbabweans have to stay at home and cut on spending even with limited income. He said the ripple effects of the coronavirus pandemic could reverberate for years to come, particularly for the informal sector. “We are going to have to adapt very quickly on living on very little. For many people it is about how to get enough money to pay for other essentials, remember people pay for almost everything. There is no water and other basics and people need those almost on a daily basis. It is an income issue, it is going to be hard on people who are already suffering, those who couldn’t get enough to eat before will find the going tougher, we cannot count on charities because they too will be affected. “We will have difficulties that will take long to address. The informal sector will find it hard to recover because right now they have no customers. That is the biggest challenge that the country is facing. Government could remove the two percent tax on transactions and at least give people some form of relief,” said Robertson. Already the informal sector, which is usually thriving, has been affected by low turnout of customers, but still there is a steady number of customers who visit the facilities daily notwithstanding the attendant risks. At the markets there are no hand sanitisers and social distancing is not observed, a requisite measure that government has been advocating considering the weak health facilities that have no essentials to fight coronavirus, such as ventilators. When asked why government had not shut down Mbare vegetable market, Mupedzanhamo and other markets that attract multitudes across the country, President Mnangagwa said they will be deploying health officials to monitor the situation. “The process (closure of markets) is likely to follow, but for now, we have decided to have health personnel around the area to monitor and make sure that people coming in or out of those places are screened. “If the need arises that we close Mbare (green market) and other markets, we will do so. But this is the first phase of our action to restrict free movement,” said Mnangagwa. But in an interview, Zimbabwe Doctors for Human Rights treasurer Norman Matara said the country’s informal sector is a ticking time bomb that could have a devastating impact on the country as Mnangagwa’s administration Indeed it is a matter of either to be or not to be. Zimbabweans will either stay at home and starve or go out and contract the deadly coronavirus that has killed thousands in countries with more efficient healthcare facilities. CLEANLINESS is next to Godliness, so says the Bible.
While this has been just another verse from the holy book, it never made a mark in people’s minds, not until the world was hit by Covid-19, a deadly virus that emerged from Wuhan Province in China in December last year.
As the virus spread across the world, with Zimbabwe recording its first death early last week, cleanliness has become more necessary than before, with the greatest teaching being frequently washing hands using sanitisers with 60 percent alcohol content. World Health Organisation (WHO) regulations also demand that people cover their mouths with masks whenever they suspect that they have the virus to avoid the spread of the disease. With these regulations in place, anxiety has gripped Zimbabweans, who are now stampeding to buy hand sanitisers and masks. But, health experts have warned the public against the use of improper medical masks and sanitisers.
Health authorities who spoke to the Daily News on Sunday said some of the masks being used were not serving the right purpose. “In most cases, gloves and masks can only be used for a moment, touching surfaces and disposed of soon after and not for the whole day. One can contract an infection through improper handling of the masks. Hygiene issues are of great concern when using the masks and gloves. However, most people are wearing them for the whole day, as it gives them a psychological feeling of protection.” Chonzi’s advice is in line with WHO recommendations on masks. “Only wear a mask if you are ill with Covid-19 symptoms (especially coughing) or looking after someone who may have Covid-19. Disposable face masks can only be used once. If you are not ill or looking after someone who is ill then you are wasting a mask. There is a worldwide shortage of masks, so WHO urges people to use masks wisely,” it said in a statement. WHO has advised rational use of medical masks to avoid unnecessary wastage of precious resources and misuse of masks.
“The most effective ways to protect yourself and others against Covid-19 are to frequently wash your hands, cover your cough with the bend of elbow or tissue and maintain a distance of at least a metre from people who are coughing or sneezing.” Following the death of broadcaster Zororo Makamba on Monday due to Covid-19, Zimbabweans rushed to buy all sorts of masks to avoid contracting Covid-19. However, unscrupulous entrepreneurs are taking advantage of the shortage of masks and hand sanitisers on the formal market, and have flooded the informal market with fake products. Local hand sanitiser manufacturers are operating below capacity due to foreign currency challenges, hence failing to meet demand in the formal market. Another expert in detergents, David Tsungo of Kusi Chemicals, urged the public to buy hand sanitisers from reputable companies. While hand sanitisers are in short supply, the most sought after product is found on the parallel market with competitive prices. Fake sanitisers and inappropriate masks have now flooded markets in mostly Mbare, Highfield and other high density suburbs. They are being sold at an average US$1, depending on location and quantity. Most formal shops have run out of genuine products.
Standard Association of Zimbabwe (SAZ) director-general Eve Gadzikwa encourages hand sanitiser brand owners to bring their brands for certification. “At the moment, we do not have hand sanitiser brands that we have certified, and we encourage the companies to come for certification for the benefit of the public. “We encourage consumers to exercise caution when buying goods and services, they should buy certified products and this will help them in distinguishing the fake and genuine ones. If people buy fake products, it will not save any purpose, especially in this period when people are trying to stop the spread of Covid-19,” Gadzikwa said. “For genuine hand sanitisers, consumers should look at the alcohol content and that must be at least 60 percent. Hand sanitisers should be used correctly and users should avoid operating close to flames as alcohol is flammable.”
Gadzikwa said her organisation will be open during this period. “As SAZ, we are doing our part to fight the Covid-19. We are currently promoting two standards: Occupational Health and Safety Standard ISO 45001 and also ZWS 992 HIV and Wellness Standards,” she said.
SAZ does not compel brand owners to certify their products — the process is voluntary. Meanwhile, WHO advises people to use water and soap if there are no hand sanitisers. “You can reduce your chances of being infected or of spreading Covid-19 by taking some simple precautions, including regularly and thoroughly cleaning your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with soap and water,” WHO said in a statement. “Why? Washing your hands with soap and water kills viruses that may be on your hands.” To help the situation, Chinese billionaire Jack Ma, the co-founder of online store Alibaba, donated thousands of Covid-19 test kits, masks and protective clothing to the continent, with the first batch of the consignment being received in Ethiopia on Sunday.The equipment arrived in Zimbabwe on Tuesday. “A consignment of goods from the Alibaba Foundation arrives in the country today. It includes 20 000 test kits, 100 000 medical face masks and 1 000 protective suits and shields,” the government confirmed in a statement. Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 