COMPANIES are increasing levels of stocks or working to ensure consistent supply of products in the wake of coronavirus, which has threatened economic growth plans. Major industries and some of the country’s recreational facilities have started closing down, and taking responsive measures to decongest their premises. Caledonia Mining Corporation (Caledonia) said it has put measures to avert the effects of the South African lockdown from affecting gold production from its Blanket mine. The Zimbabwean-focused gold miner said management does not expect that its Blanket mine will be forced to suspend gold production. Caledonia said in the event of a lockdown procedure in Zimbabwe, or an outbreak of Covid-19 infections at Blanket affecting a significant number of employees and necessitating a mine shut down, Caledonia would enter this unprecedented situation with a strong balance sheet with cash on hand at March 25, 2020 of approximately $12,5 million. Dairibord Holdings (Dairibord) said it has put in place risk mitigation measures to ensure consistent supply of products in response to the pandemic. The milk producer said its processing technology is such that all products are exposed to sterilization temperatures that render the intrinsic product safe from disease causing organisms such as Covid-19. Simbisa Brands (Simbisa) said the impact of coronavirus on the business could not be estimated yet. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); A mini survey by the Confederations of Zimbabwe Industries (CZI) has shown that the local manufacturing sector has suffered a 46 percent disruption in supply chains due to the pandemic. “Zimbabwe will experience major dislocations in exports and imports as the virus spreads and countries adopt restrictive responses that curb manufacturing activities,” the country’s largest industrial body said. Zimbabwe’s major trading partners such as China, South Africa, South Korea, Italy, Spain and Iran have been affected by the lethal virus.