AS ZIMBABWE begins to ease its coronavirus mitigation measures, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has warned that it is dangerous for countries to open their economies without enough safeguards, the Daily News reports.The warning comes as the government is at odds with teachers who argue that the plans by authorities to re-launch class learning is premature due to Covid-19 safety shortcomings.Addressing a virtual meeting with journalists yesterday, WHO director-general Tedros Ghebreyesus said coronavirus was still a threat.“Eight months into the pandemic, we understand that people are tired and yearn to get on with their lives.
“We understand that countries want to get their societies and economies going again. That’s what WHO wants too,” he said.
“Stay-at-home orders and other restrictions are something that some countries felt they needed to do to take pressure off their health systems.“But they have taken a heavy toll on livelihoods, economies and mental health. WHO fully supports efforts to reopen economies and societies.“We want to see children returning to school and people returning to the workplace, but we want to see it done safely,” Ghebreyesus added.WHO’s warning comes as local authorities are planning to partially reopen learning centres ahead of the forthcoming end of year examinations.However, teachers have claimed that the government has done little to improve infrastructure at schools to enable a safe return to classes.Yesterday, the Progressive Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) set tough conditions for teachers to return to face-to-face teaching.“The employer should increase our salaries to at least the poverty datum line (which experts put at about $24 800 a month for a family of five) while the employer is making permanent arrangements to restore the purchasing power parity of US$520.
“Government and its partners must ensure that there are adequate, standard PPE before schools can reopen, because our findings suggest schools have very little resources to fund this initiative.“Nurses and doctors must also be back at work so that if there is an outbreak linked to the unfortunate decision to restart face-to-face learning, the sick can be attended to.
“Learners should be given enough time to finish syllabuses when schools open, before they can be considered ready for national examinations,” PTUZ secretary-general Raymond Majongwe said in a letter to the government.He added that it was ironic that both Cabinet and ministry officials had held virtual meetings, but had taken the decision that schools should reopen for face-to-face meetings.“To us, it is a tacit admission that face-to-face meetings and teaching and learning are still dangerous waters.
“Be that as it may, we make these submissions, notwithstanding the fact that we believe the government is trying to experiment with teachers and learners,” Majongwe said.  The warning comes as the government is at odds with teachers who argue that the plans by authorities to re-launch class learning is premature due to Covid-19 safety shortcomings.  Addressing a virtual meeting with journalists yesterday, WHO director-general Tedros Ghebreyesus said coronavirus was still a threat.   “But they have taken a heavy toll on livelihoods, economies and mental health. WHO fully supports efforts to reopen economies and societies.  “We want to see children returning to school and people returning to the workplace, but we want to see it done safely,” Ghebreyesus added.  WHO’s warning comes as local authorities are planning to partially reopen learning centres ahead of the forthcoming end of year examinations.  However, teachers have claimed that the government has done little to improve infrastructure at schools to enable a safe return to classes.  Yesterday, the Progressive Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) set tough conditions for teachers to return to face-to-face teaching.  “The employer should increase our salaries to at least the poverty datum line (which experts put at about $24 800 a month for a family of five) while the employer is making permanent arrangements to restore the purchasing power parity of US$520.
“Government and its partners must ensure that there are adequate, standard PPE before schools can reopen, because our findings suggest schools have very little resources to fund this initiative.  “Nurses and doctors must also be back at work so that if there is an outbreak linked to the unfortunate decision to restart face-to-face learning, the sick can be attended to.
“Learners should be given enough time to finish syllabuses when schools open, before they can be considered ready for national examinations,” PTUZ secretary-general Raymond Majongwe said in a letter to the government.  He added that it was ironic that both Cabinet and ministry officials had held virtual meetings, but had taken the decision that schools should reopen for face-to-face meetings.  “To us, it is a tacit admission that face-to-face meetings and teaching and learning are still dangerous waters.
“Be that as it may, we make these submissions, notwithstanding the fact that we believe the government is trying to experiment with teachers and learners,” Majongwe said. 