Austin Karonga 
SPORTS WRITER 
karongaa@dailynews.co.zw ZIMBABWE’S Vincent Fambira won gold in the Kobudo Short Weapons 16+ category during the inaugural two-day World Online Kata Championships which ended on Sunday. A total of 40 countries and 634 participants took part in the event, which saw Zimbabwe finish with six medals overall. Fambira was tied in first place with Andrea Novikov of Russia as they both had 23.7 points after performing the hama higa no tonfa kata using the tonfa weapon. Malta’s Erika Gauci finished in second place with 23.5 points while Darwin Sumida of the United States was fourth with 23.4 points. Fambira had to settle for a silver medal in the Kobodo Long Weapons category where he performed the tom abo kata using the bo/staff to tie for second place with Malta’s Shauna Gauci while Nivikov claimed gold. The other Zimbabwean representatives in the competition were Wilfred Mashaya and his five-year-old son Wilfred Jnr. In the Under-6 category, Wilfried Jnr won a bronze medal after tying on 23.6 points with Russia’s Danila Kabanov. The young Kobudo fighter also competed in the Short Weapons Under-10 years category where he finished in fifth place. Mashaya Snr came second in the Kobudo long weapons 35+ category behind Johan Backteman of Sweden while Russia’s Ekaterina Zaika came third and Raj Pandaram of South Africa was fourth. “It was a competition, a display of weapon katas that one was supposed to do and send the recordings online,” Mashaya Snr told the Daily News yesterday. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “I’m very happy that our youngsters did very well competing with seasoned campaigners from Russia, Japan, Germany, Italy, US to name just a few. “And it being our first time, it’s quite encouraging that we have a world champion in Vincent and with the youngster winning a bronze medal, we can see that the future of Kobudo is very bright. “The tournament was held online for the first time owing to the Covid-19 pandemic that is currently seeing worldwide travel restrictions. “We believe that with enough support, training resources and financial support we can do more for the country as we believe we still have much to show the world what Zimbabwe warriors are made of.”