VIODEOGRAPHER Nicole Ngulube, 27 whose interest in capturing interesting moments inspired her deeper desire to learn photography and videography. The Bulawayo based started out capturing school and family events and friends’ parties before taking it up as a profession.  She interned with Bulawayo-based Multimedia Box where she learned camera operation and other film processes. Through this she’s been involved in the production of several documentaries and films as a camera operator. Nicole is currently completing her studies in Journalism and Media Studies at the National University and Science and Technology in Bulawayo, and continues to use photography to “immortalise experiences in my surroundings”. She is now part of the Film and TV Resources group in Bulawayo where she’s actively involved as a camera assistant, make-up assistant and photographer. She is also part of the on-going Amavuso Project which has so far pulled together conversations around the subject and practice of favours for sexual favours from isolation in different parts of Southern Africa, and delivering it in the new order of theatre in this new age -driven online. The Amavuso Project is a multimedia performance initiative which aims to portray authentic and diverse perspectives on what’s widely known as the ‘blesser’ phenomenon, as an increasingly accepted popular culture. The performance will aim to give audiences a sense and feel of the interactions between ‘blessers’ and ‘blessees’, exploring the pervasiveness and impact of social media. The project is presented by Sibikwa Arts Centre (Johannesburg, South Africa) together with Nhimbe Trust (Bulawayo, Zimbabwe), and created and performed by an all-female creative team from the two countries, integrated by video footage and other digital elements, built from engagements and discussion on the page which was set up to gather society’s overall view on the subject. The Amavuso Project is supported by an ANT Mobility Grant from Pro Helvetia Johannesburg financed by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Of the Amavuso Project Nicole says: “I am grateful for the experience of working in an all-female production as it is so empowering. The environment is good and supportive and it’s a great feeling to know that we women can also do anything that we set our minds and strength to, despite the patriarchal influence. The devotion from the team was phenomenal, despite all the hours, but none gave up…stories coming alive from a piece of paper to motion pictures is indeed some sort of miracle. I am excited about the Amavuso project as it is a very uniquely crafted production, and I hope it will be appreciated by many.”