 Reviewed by Eddie Zvinonzwa Grey Angels; By Virgina Phiri; Harare, Coral Services, 2018. ISBN: 978-1-7792-9503-3 (Paperback) 238 pages  WHEN I saw the smile on Virginia Phiri’s face as she greeted me holding a copy of Grey Angels, I could tell something had indeed changed on the book. I then recalled a lengthy telephone conversation with the writer earlier as she narrated how badly her book had been handled then. This time she exuded usual radiance, joy and outright excitement as she handed over the autographed copy and I promised to do justice to it. I did not know what was in store as I immediately set to flip through, just scanning for something that could strike my eyes. Grey Angels – which narrates the tussle between tradition and modernity – is no ordinary book by any standards. It would have been befitting to run this review around February 6, which is annually the day when the International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation is marked worldwide. That way, the reading of Grey Angels becomes even more fitting as the author therein tussles with the bush school where Linda is forced to go. The plot of the story rests on the intertwined conflicts that the reader meets in the narrative. For instance, Father has already planned to get Linda – a girl of exceptional power and determination – married to Dr Swagga just to get his personal whims satisfied without even checking whether his daughter was interested in the first place. One would think Father is a staunch traditionalist but the other things he does are not consistent with that. The various conflicts that push the complex plot ahead in the book are neatly intertwined to produce an exhilarating narrative. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  One of Jojo’s greatest weaknesses is his greed as shown by his selling off his daughter to the Addos. The Addos expect to get Linda who should be married off to Michael Addos. Because of the failure of the arrangement, Jojo is evading the Addos, who will leave no stone unturned in order to get what they paid for. Jojo even harasses Billy with whom Linda has fallen in love, so that prospects of success for the deal he has stitched with the Addos seem clear. He even hopes they could get Isabella if the Linda deal falls through. “It turned out that he was not in West Africa but in Europe. According to his sources, father was on the run from the Addos hired thugs. It looked like this time he was in big trouble as he had neither returned the money nor delivered the bride as promised. Jojo stops at nothing in order to make money. The establishment of the Tradition, Culture and Research Institute is driven by greed. “My loyal former students, Adam and David, have been working tirelessly to help me establish my own Tradition, Culture and Research Institute … We have the money and the premises have already been purchased.” (p159) The eventual and inevitable collapse of the institute, which was conducting “unethical experiments”, was unavoidable. “I was embarrassed that my own Father had caused the injuries because of greed and ambition.” (p181) Phiri has published Desperate (2002) Destiny (2006) and Highway Queen (2010). While the woman and girl child remain her protagonists, another intriguing aspect of her writing is the poignancy in her narratives, something that is also present in Grey Angels. 