WITH Zimbabwe’s political crisis deepening amid growing calls for an inclusive dialogue, senior consultant with the International Crisis Group Piers Pigou, told the Daily News on Sunday last week that South Africa must work with the country’s all-weather friends, China and Russia, to find solutions. Below are the excerpts. Q: What is your assessment of Zimbabwe ‘s political and economic situation?
A: In very poor shape, and remains on a negative trajectory for the time being. Q: What do you think is the best way forward for Zimbabwe? Q: Do you think the government has the capacity to solve the current crisis? A: It doesn’t have a viable roadmap, and will not develop one or implement one without the requisite political will Q: Do the opposition have the wherewithal to challenge Zanu PF given the power dynamics within their ranks? A: The opposition has illustrated some capacity to challenge the government and ruling party on certain fronts, but has not been able to translate this into a clear strategy that has momentum and feeds into a broader-based alliance of interests that promote a national agenda. Q: What does the opposition need to do in terms of strategy? googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); A: Actively contribute to building a broad-based alliance and related strategy that promotes national solutions, dialogue and a reform programme that deals with the fundamental challenges as I have already outlined, but that also focuses on bread and butter issues that gives priority to local mobilisation and activism. The opposition has space to demonstrate excellent leadership through local government (especially urban)arenas where it remains a dominant political player. In areas where it is not, it should promote actions that seek to promote accountable governance. Q: What can South Africa do to assist in resolving Zimbabwe‘s problems?
A: The shift to a more public critique is an important stepping stone to promoting a more honest engagement around the issues in play. This discussion should be extended and shared with other Sadc and AU member States, in terms of government to government. South Africa’s governing party should also promote a more open discussion around governance and democratic deficits amongst liberation movements as it relates to Zimbabwe. There is an opportunity to help sort fact from fiction and to demonstrate leadership on efforts strengthen good governance options. Q: What leverage does SA have over Zim to force a solution?
A: Limited, given it will not use the same kind of leverage that the apartheid regime did against Ian Smith when it needed to force its hand. This includes dealing more pragmatically with issues around sanctions, ZDERA, access to new lines of credit, debt relief etc. All of this requires candidness in engagement that we have yet to see from the government of Zimbabwe.
South African involvement can help focus on the real issues, but ultimately it is contingent on the government of Zimbabwe demonstrating good faith and a commitment to resolving these issues. It has not done so to date. Q: Can Harare listen to South Africa when Zanu PF seems not keen to have it mediate its crisis?
A: This is about political will and as we have seen, Zanu PF’s official position remains denial and counter-attack. Their approach effectively undermines options that could promote remedy, and holds Zimbabwe hostage.
South Africa should not be expected to ‘mediate’ or address this issue alone and should have the support of others from the region and beyond.  Q: In your view, what is impeding inclusive dialogue to take place in Zimbabwe and what should be done for the negotiations to commence? A: Political will and the primacy of power retention, the asymmetry of power in favour of Zanu PF militates against any meaningful dialogue, which they perceive as threatening to dilute their current position. Q: If Zanu fails to solve the current crisis, what consequences will this have on the country?
A: Zimbabwe will continue its path to impoverishment, in which a select connected few will do handsomely.
The State will continue to lose its capacities and competencies and will remain riven by corruption and patronage, as institutions hollow out and the majority eke a liking out on the margins.  Q: Mnangagwa has been in office for two years, your assessment of his performance politically and economically thus far? A: Failure, disappointment and lost opportunity Q: What do you think ED’s international re-engagement has gone off rail? A: Because his administration has been unable to demonstrate bona fides of reforms and related implementation; that they have returned to repressive formulae to address critics, and they have spurned the widespread goodwill that followed the November 2017 coup. Q: Is there still international goodwill for ED and his government?
A: If they actively start to walk the talk, there would be traction for this. On the current game plan, there is widespread disappointment. Some, especially Western countries, but now also from the continent, concerns are vocalised, but many continue to sit on their hands. It is instructive that you don’t see any consistent praise from external players (including fair-weather friends such as China) for what is going on. By all accounts they are also deeply worried by the current trajectory. Q: Let’s turn to main opposition leader Nelson Chamisa. What do you think he can do in resolving the Zimbabwe crisis?
A: Play a more active statesman like role — provide leadership around ‘national solutions’ to specific challenges, and actively seek out and start engaging an array of ‘Zanu PF’ constituencies .. especially the military .. some of this must be above the radar, others below, but he must be more actively seen to be seeking national solutions that are not ostensibly rooted in seeking party political advantage. Q: Is it wise for him to continue questioning ED’s legitimacy or it’s now time to work with ED to find solutions to the crisis?
A: The illegitimacy issue has become a millstone around Chamisa’s neck. He can continue questioning this, but he needs to focus on what it will take to fix things — highlight the structural challenges, failure of reform agenda etc. At the moment, continued posturing around the legitimacy question feeds the impression that his interests are politically selective. Q: Your take on assertions that Chamisa is unstrategic and too soft to handle ED and his government as shown by his empty threats since the elections in 2018?
A: Chamisa has limited power and leverage in this equation.
His power comes from being able to demonstrate his support base, and he should be focusing on providing a national analysis and commentary whilst focusing on building and mobilising that support base and the political infrastructure needed to activate it, even in challenging circumstances.