Mugove Tafirenyika
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zw PRESIDENT Emmerson Mnangagwa has once again reached out to MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa and other opposition leaders for dialogue to end the country’s myriad crises, the Daily News reports. In addition, the 77-year-old Zanu PF leader also said the country’s deepening challenges required unity of purpose among all Zimbabweans to mitigate them. This comes as South Africa President Cyril Ramaphosa has been trying to intervene in Zimbabwe’s decades-long political and economic crises. Ramaphosa has since appointed special envoys — former vice president Baleka Mbete, ex-ministers Sydney Mufamadi and Ngoako Ramatlhodi — to lead his mediation efforts. Speaking at a meeting of the Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) in Harare yesterday, Mnangagwa said the door remained open for Chamisa and other opposition leaders who had earlier snubbed the platform to join him there and work together to deal with Zimbabwe’s problems. This also comes as the government has recently implored all Zimbabweans to start believing that they have a role to play in efforts to resolve the country’s challenges, without relying on outside help. Speaking to the Daily News earlier this week, Mnangagwa’s spokesperson George Charamba said it was disconcerting to see that some Zimbabweans expected the country’s problems to be resolved by foreigners. “That line of thinking is misguided and has been adopted by individuals who have put their faith in foreigners for assistance. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “We, therefore, need someone who facilitates dialogue. But it cannot be passive facilitation. Facilitation and mediation are not mutually exclusive. They complement each other. “I suggest that South Africa, wearing the hat of the African Union chair and as a Sadc member, can do both under the auspices of the regional framework — because if it acts bilaterally it might not have sufficient influence,” he said further. This comes as there are growing calls from both within and outside the country for Mnangagwa and Chamisa to set aside their differences and hold much-needed talks to extricate the country from its deepening crises. Both Mnangagwa and Chamisa have previously said that they were interested in dialogue, although nothing concrete has happened — primarily because of differences over the form and platform on which the talks should take place. On his part, Mnangagwa has been consistent that any talks with Chamisa should be held under Polad — where he regularly holds meetings with fringe opposition leaders. Chamisa himself has ruled out joining Polad — demanding instead direct dialogue with Mnangagwa. All this comes as Zimbabwe is in the grip of a huge economic crisis — its worst in a decade — which has stirred anger and restlessness among long-suffering ordinary people. So big are the local problems, that authorities have had several clashes with government critics who accuse the country’s leaders of failing to end the nation’s economic crisis and rampant public sector graft. In July, authorities were forced to deploy security forces across the country to thwart mass anti-government demonstrations that had been called by the opposition and pro-democracy groups. Rights groups have since claimed that dozens of opposition figures and activists have been tortured and assaulted in a retributive exercise by suspected security agents. On its part, the government has refuted the allegations — claiming instead that the opposition is allegedly working with foreigners to destabilise the country.