Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw WHILE most local football leaders have taken a back seat owing to the coronavirus (Covid-19), the Zifa Northern Region Division One League has once again taken a leading role after unveiling Anzaequip Earthmovers as their commercial partner. The company which specialises in the hiring out of earthmovers as well as training of operators will now be bankrolling the second-tier league’s Coach of the Month and Coach of the Year awards. When football finally returns, the Coach of the Month will pocket US$150 while the overall winner at the end of the year will walk away with US$1 200. Besides bankrolling the awards, Anzaequip will also help the league capacitate their coaches by hosting online coaching courses and securing attachments abroad. Northern Region chairperson Martin Kweza said the league will continue to strive for excellence even in these tough economic times brought about by Covid-19. “What makes it even more unique is the belief and trust in our brand and professional work ethics by our esteemed partner.  “Their commitment to partner us at a time when there are no football activities is unprecedented and it gives a seal of approval to the NRSL brand.  “The sponsorship package is distinctive in our football league as it is going to impel the most important member of any club’s technical team. “As Northern Region, we deemed it fit to find a partner who could prop up the esteem of every coach in our league and ensure that we express our gratitude in rewarding their excellence based on merit. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Anzaequip operations manager Brighton Fakamari said the professionalism exhibited by the Northern Region over the years was a big reason they came on board. “We believe by partnering Northern Region, our organisation will benefit immensely as we get to interact with the business and football communities in the Northern Region. “This partnership will surely improve our visibility, network and business synergies. Our marketing strategy is to use football to grow our market share in a win-win situation.” The main title sponsor for the Northern Region is Ruyamuro Service Stations which over the years has provided a vehicle to the league’s top player.