 Mugove Tafirenyika
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
tafirenyikam@dailynews.co.zwGOVERNMENT intends to drastically reduce the number of days people, especially foreigners in transit, spend in quarantine centres awaiting coronavirus (Covid-19) test results, from a maximum of 14 to two.  This comes amid complaints of inconvenience by people travelling on emergencies as the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test results being carried out by the ministry of Health currently take up to 14 days.  Speaking at Encore Budget Lodge quarantine centre in Victoria Falls on Friday last week, Social Welfare minister Paul Mavima said it was absurd that people were being kept in quarantine centres even when they are proven to be Covid-19-free.  that people travel to their areas,” Mavima said.  However, Zimbabwe Nurses Association president Enock Dongo described the government’s plans as “wishful thinking because the resources they have don’t permit”.  “They don’t have the resources, results take time. It is true that results can be processed within five hours but do they have the wherewithal? Let us wait and see if they can afford it. We are currently struggling with our own testing and now I do not see how they will be able to take just a day or two for those in transit,” Dongo said.  This comes as a family of eight Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) nationals entered the country via Beitbridge from South Africa and arrived in Victoria Falls last week.  The family is currently quarantined at Encore Budget alongside six locals returning from various countries.
The DRC nationals are on their way to their motherland to bury their father and are waiting for results following PCR tests done a day after their arrival.  They cannot, however, proceed as immigration authorities are said to be reportedly waiting for the eight’s test results before they can clear them to proceed.  This comes as the country recently received personal protective equipment and eight tonnes of medical items from Russia to fight Covid-19, with the two countries also agreeing to collaborate in research, science and technology to find tangible solutions to battle the global pandemic.