 GOVERNMENT of Zimbabwe believes the Bulawayo Day and Bulawayo Arts Festival  is ‘a noble act of inclusivity’ that ‘nurtures participatory and sustainable development for society, in line with the vision of devolution’. Bulawayo City Council and its technical partner Nhimbe Trust which held this year’s event virtually have released a report of the inaugural launch of the Bulawayo Day and Bulawayo Arts Festival 2020. Conceived through a cultural cooperation partnership and endorsed by Council Resolutions, both Bulawayo Day and Bulawayo Arts Festival, celebrated annually from 1 to 5 June, have been recognised by the Citing the Festival’s mission which is that of ‘promoting and strengthening the role of arts and culture as drivers of inclusive and sustainable development, through the mainstreaming of cultural policies and initiatives in Bulawayo’s urban development strategies,’ the report offers a synthesis of the cultural cooperation agreement between Bulawayo City Council and Nhimbe Trust. It maps international and local instruments and frameworks that have guided the crystallisation of the partnership. Amid challenges caused by the Covid-19 global pandemic, the report documents how the cultural and creative sector re-adjusted to digital programming, in advancement of Bulawayo’s SMART City Strategy.  It also tracks artist and audience impressions, and digital viewership and engagement of over 144,000 reached in 45 different countries across the world. “The hosting of a virtual festival by the City of Bulawayo and its technical partner was a major breakthrough in not only bringing various artists together, but in positioning the City’s creative industry in the international virtual artistic stage of prominence, further cementing our brand as a cultural hub. In adding to these sentiments Josh Nyapimbi, Nhimbe Executive Director said: “The launch of the report is especially significant as a means of celebrating the richness, robustness and resilience of Bulawayo’s cultural and creative sector.  It is a critical first step in situating reflections that take stock of the momentum that has been realised in attempts aimed at domesticating and localising SDGs through a cultural expression lens.”   The report’s highlights include; 161 contracted professionals (58.4 percent male; 41.6 percent females): inclusive of technical team, production team and performers; 39 featured acts across five genres (music, poetry, dance, theatre, comedy); Facebook streaming reach of 144 265 people as at 30 June 2020 and; audience’s overall festival rating: Poor impressions 2.5 percent; Fair impressions 7.5 percent; Good impression 47.5 percent; Excellent impression 42.5 percent. 