OPINION by Tapiwa Mashakada  WHEN people talk about a National Transitional Authority (NTA) it sounds like a new idea altogether. Yet there is nothing new about it. In my view, it is all about nomenclature or semantics. A transitional authority is a transitional government by any other name. The only difference is that the NTA is a team of technocrats. The first transition in Zimbabwe took place in 1978 in what was called the Internal Settlement of Bishop Abel Muzorewa, Ndabaningi Sithole, Chief Kayisa Ndiweni, Chief Jeremiah Chirau and Ian Smith. The second transition took place between December 1979 to 18 April 1980 when democratic elections were held and Robert Mugabe and Zanu PF won 57 seats. Joshua Nkomo and Zapu won 20 seats. Muzorewa won 3 seats. The African Union and Sadc had to underwrite the Global Political Agreement that was signed by Zanu PF, MDC and MDC-T in 2008. This resulted in the formation of the government of national unity, which in my view, was a transitional authority or transitional government. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); There is a raging debate whether due to electoral irregularities, the 2018 elections produced a legitimate president. But the fact of the matter is that a petition was taken to the Constitutional Court and Mnangagwa was declared the winner. He was duly sworn in as the President of Zimbabwe, head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces. His first term expires in 2023. The NTA or any other transitional arrangement presupposes either a constitutional crisis where there is a power vacuum or a situation where the ruling party accepts to step down and surrender power to unelected technocrats. In conclusion, Zimbabwe has been transitioning to democracy intermittently since 1978. The NTA is not a new thing. It is a matter of semantics and nomenclature. The transitional authority is a difficult proposition in the absence of a constitutional crisis. Rather a transitional government is possible since it can be a negotiated power sharing arrangement with a defined timeline and a defined governance agenda. Mashakada is the founder and executive director of the Maji-Marefu Institute, an independent pan-African Think Tank on International Relations, Economic Affairs and Security Studies.