Comedian Charles Mirisi, aka Marabha, has found new love and is in the process of formalising the affair, the Daily News on Sunday reports. The lucky woman is 20-year-old Anisha Chigasa. “This lady (Anisha) is my girlfriend. We have plans to formalise the relationship and settle down,” Marabha said without giving much detail on how he met his new sweetheart.  Anisha confirmed the affair, telling the Daily News on Sunday at the artist’s Epworth home on Wednesday that she is happy to be part of the popular comedian’s life. Marabha’s brother, Paradzai Mirisi, told this publication that it was good for the ailing Charles to have a wife again. Owing to poor health, Marabha now lives with Paradzai in Domboramwari in Epworth. “Marabha used to stay in Waterfalls (in Harare) with his first wife. After they separated, I took him in as there was no one to take care of him. I was the one who nursed Marabha with the help of my wife,” he said.    Marabha sustained a permanent head injury four years ago in Mt Hampden on his way from Chinhoyi. “He was travelling in a kombi with other passengers. He had a misunderstanding with some of the guys in the kombi and one of them struck him severally with a brick in the head. Around June, Marabha fell critically ill. The news attracted the attention of well-wishers who swiftly intervened to assist him. They donated cash and goodies.  Sekuru Banda (a Harare traditional healer and philanthropist) went an extra mile by building him an eight-roomed house. When the Daily News on Sunday crew visited the Mirisi family on Thursday, Marabha’s house was almost 70 percent complete. “More bags of cement are still needed for plastering and flooring. Doors, windows and part of the roofing sheets are still to be delivered, but we are happy with the way Sekuru Banda and others have honoured their pledges,” Paradzai said. Marabha is the third born in a family of five. “The doctors have permanently put him (Marabha) on drugs. He is also ordered to avoid mental stresses. However, some of the drugs he is taking are quite expensive and these include Carbamazepine tablets. We cannot afford them,” he said. Carbamazepine is an anti-convulsant or anti-epileptic drug that reduces nerve impulses that cause seizures and nerve pain, such as trigeminal neuralgia and diabetic neuropathy. The drug is also used to treat bipolar disorder.