Godknows Matarutse 
SPORTS WRITER 
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw FORMER Warriors and Dynamos forward Edward “Duduza” Sadomba has teamed-up with local football agent George Deda in an initiative to help the current generation of footballers prepare for life after the game. Since time immemorial, local football is laden with numerous rags-to-riches and back-to-rags tales as ex-footballers fail to cope with retirement. Football is a very short career with most players’ peak financial powers lasting for between eight to 10 years. However, football stars fail to invest properly as they spend their income on booze, women, cars and expensive clothing only to fall on hard times after they hang up their boots. Although he never managed to crack into the top European leagues, Sadomba has left a lasting legacy on the continent having played for such giants like DeMbare, Al-Hilal (Sudan), Al-Ahly (Benghazi), Al-Ahli (Tripoli), Liga Muculumana (Mozambique) and Bidvest Wits (South Africa). Sadomba, who turned 37 yesterday, is revered in Sudan where he is considered an Al-Hilal legend after two prolific spells with the club. Last year when FC Platinum travelled to Omdurman to take on Hilal in the African Champions League, the home team’s fans displayed banners with the message “We Love Sadomba”. While most African stars earn their millions in Europe, Sadomba was able to use his earnings from across the continent to invest heavily in real estate in Harare’s leafy suburbs which allows him to live a comfortable life in retirement. Having grown up in the impoverished and populous township of Mbare, the former Harare United forward’s journey is the perfect epitome of a rags-to-riches fairy tale. In a bid to buck the trend of former footballers falling on hard times once they retire, Sadomba and Deda are now mentoring young players so they avoid the pitfalls that accompany stardom. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “At the end of the day, I give Glory to God for all that I have achieved in my career and life. I hope to inspire the coming generation going forward.” Deda, who has in recent years helped secure foreign moves for many Zimbabwean players, hopes working with Sadomba would be an inspiration to a lot of current stars. “He has invested wisely and has a decent life. So we are hoping he will help these upcoming youngsters by sharing with them how he managed to do it.
“He is a role model; there is no doubt about that. He is a family man and never have I heard of any scandals.