THE United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has revealed that over one million women and children in Zimbabwe are suffering from malnutrition and are in urgent need of food assistance.
This comes as the World Food Programme Zimbabwe (WFP) recently appealed for US$250 million to boost food assistance in the country, warning that 8,6 million people will face starvation by December 2020. “Drought and crop failure, exacerbated by macro-economic challenges and austerity measures, have directly affected vulnerable households in both rural and urban communities.
“Inﬂation continues to erode purchasing power and affordability of food and other essential goods is a daily challenge. “Nutritional needs remain high, with over 1,1 million children and women requiring urgent nutrition assistance. Child malnutrition, including acute malnutrition or wasting, is also expected to increase due to steep declines in household incomes, changes in the availability and affordability of nutritious foods, and interruptions to health, nutrition, and social protection services,” the humanitarian office said. “The impact of the coronavirus (Covid-19) is likely to result in at least an additional 15 000 children being wasted, in addition to the 100 000 children expected to be wasted this year. “In addition, numbers of pellagra cases are likely to continue to increase as food insecurity in the country deepens and household income for accessing diversiﬁed diets continues to be depleted by the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown and economic crisis.” The OCHA added that the nutrition status of children in Zimbabwe was being further compounded by already existing sub-optimal infant and young child feeding practices, including very poor dietary diversity at 15 percent and with only seven percent having attained the minimum acceptable diet. “Due to the drought-induced food insecurity, the majority of households in the country require food assistance to facilitate adequate dietary intake and prevent deterioration of the nutrition status of children, women and other vulnerable groups like the disabled. Already nationally 56 percent of women consume less than ﬁve groups of recommended foods,” the OCHA said. Zimbabwe has been battling its worst economic crisis in a decade which has been exacerbated by recurring drought, leaving millions of both rural and urban populations facing starvation. The humanitarian office further indicated that at least four million vulnerable Zimbabweans are currently facing challenges in accessing primary health care. This comes as doctors, nurses and other health workers have been on strike for over two months citing poor remuneration and lack of personal protective equipment (PPE) to avoid coronavirus infection. The government has on various occasions appealed to the health workers to dialogue and return to work while their challenges are being resolved, but the striking health workers have refused to go back to work until their grievances are addressed. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “At least four million vulnerable Zimbabweans are facing challenges accessing primary health care and drought conditions trigger several health risks. “There has been a continued declining access and utilisation of essential services including preventive, curative and rehabilitation services, with several provinces reporting decreased access to health services a result of insufficient health workers-industrial action, health workers in isolation/quarantine as a result of Covid-19 infection; insufficient PPE; and the recent institution of user fees in facilities. “Several health facilities particularly in urban areas request Covid-19 test results before they can attend to patients,” the OCHA said. The OCHA further said the decreasing availability of safe water, sanitation and hygiene has heightened the risk of communicable disease outbreaks for 3,7 million vulnerable people. “The main challenges (in Zimbabwe’s health system) relate to health care workers, including persistent industrial action by nurses, notice to strike by additional health worker cadres, and increasing number of health workers infected with Covid-19. “Covid-19 response, including delayed implementation of national decisions aimed at scaling up community surveillance, contact tracing and community-level isolation facilities, insufficient capacity for hospitalisation of moderate-severe ill Covid-19 patients, and delayed placement of orders of essential supplies (lab kits, PPE) including where funding is already available; and delivery of essential health services, with declining coverage of essential services as of end June 2020, and 26 districts out of 63 districts reporting routine immunisation coverage with 80 percent,” the humanitarian office said.