© CITIZENS’ Manifesto, a broad-based non-partisan convergence platform of citizen groups in the country, says an inclusive national dialogue is important in resolving the political and economic crises. (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Daily News on Sunday Assistant Editor Maxwell Sibanda caught up with Briggs Bomba, the  convener of Citizens’ Manifesto, and discussed a number of issues, including the focus of the organisation and its work, the multi-faceted challenges and reform process in the country, the operating environment for civil society, and the path towards solutions, including increasing calls for an inclusive national dialogue.
Below are excerpts of the interview: Q: One of the resolutions, from the recent Citizens’ Manifesto Convention, was to call for an inclusive national dialogue. What does this dialogue look like and mean to you?
A: Citizens’ Manifesto has joined forces with a broad array of civic voices from the faith-based community, labour and other apex civic formations towards building a consolidated platform that speaks with one voice under the National Convergence Platform. This journey in itself has been very intentional and required building trust, consensus and a common commitment to putting the citizens, country, and constitutionalism first.
In our view, an inclusive national dialogue is imperative at this point. Past dialogues, whether at the economic level or national level have historically been too narrow and thus the results have not been sustainable. Under the National Convergence Platform we are building consensus on the framework for dialogue, as all parties have had some conversation within their constituencies on the process.
What is clear is that the conditions for dialogue have to be created by those who are closing the space for dialogue. In our view, the areas we’ve discussed repeatedly and in depth at the National Citizens Convention offer a broad outline for the dialogue which needs to happen. Which is why the dialogue needs to be more than a power-sharing deal, hence needs to be conducted at multiple levels in our society. Q: Do you think there is appetite among the key political players in Zimbabwe for this kind of process?
A: Our hope is that the gravity of the condition of our country and the soul of our country would push the key political players to put country, citizens and constitutionalism (all values we hope they adhere to) above self-interest. We are in a crisis moment, and the depth of our crisis means the solutions cannot and should not lie in any one actor across the spectrum. The pain of citizens is unbearable, and there needs to be some immediate relief or social protection to citizens, especially the most vulnerable. We do not have the luxury of paying lip service to working for growth and development in Zimbabwe; the only way to show it now is by all of us coming to the table and co-creating the solutions which will make citizens feel safe, hopeful and cared for by the leaders of this country. Q: You have consulted the citizens on the national dialogue issue, what are the people saying?
A: In early 2019 Citizens’ Manifesto hosted broad-based consultations with civil society on the national dialogue question, out of which came a document called ‘Towards a National Dialogue Framework’ in May 2019. In it Citizens’ Manifesto recommends an inclusive national dialogue premised on eight principles. These eight principles guide the Citizens’ Manifesto’s current position on national dialogue and these are namely; inclusivity, informed participation, safety and security of people, neutral and credible convener, technically competent facilitation, people-centred agenda, independent monitoring and international mediation and guarantee. The 2nd National Citizens Convention was most recently held in September 2019 and involved a deeper conversation and visioning of how we (as citizens) will build politics and governance which places citizens at the centre, an inclusive and sustainable economy and a new social contract which will redefine the way we relate with one another. This provided a platform for reflection and consolidating citizens’ voices in developing concrete strategies for engagement and movement building using a bottom up approach. Q: What were some of the most relevant outcomes of that meeting?
A: The 2nd National Citizens Convention sought to create a space for inclusive and deliberative platform for citizens and relevant stakeholders to engage on the national question with the view to co-create solutions that work for all. The convention declaration made a clarion call to make three Cs; Citizens, Country and Constitutionalism sacrosanct in Zimbabwe.
In addition the outcomes of the process focused on three things. The first element was developing an inclusive and sustainable economy which revives and re-thinks how local economies can provide some relief and autonomy for citizens and provide transparency and accountability in the management of our natural resources. The second element was developing people centred governance where citizens are engaging more vibrantly at the local level and strengthening the experience of participatory governance; and where leaders are defined and elected on the basis of a record not the campaign promises they make. The call for human security was also couched in this conversation, and the desperate cry of citizens to be protected by the State was a key highlight. The third element was about developing a new social contract where social values, social cohesion, reconciliation and healing are prioritised in all promises and contribute towards reweaving the social fabric of a Zimbabwean society, which is so deeply fragmented. If you think about it, even economic processes could be trust-building processes, but the top-down approach to our policy making is causing further estrangement between citizens and the institutions which are supposed to serve them. Q: How far have you gone in implementing the resolutions that came out of the convention?
A: Citizens’ Manifesto has engaged with various stakeholders, including the media, the faith community, diplomatic missions, political parties, business and other key stakeholders in both explaining who we are (which as you know there is much misconception) and how we are organising around the three areas I mentioned earlier to create models of and push for more participatory governance, local sustainable economies, and inclusive dialogue. The response has been insightful and positive. I am sure you just witnessed the commitment signing of the National Convergence Platform by various organisations on 13 December last year, a process which Citizens’ Manifesto contributed to as mandated by the Co-Conveners of the 2nd National Citizens’ Manifesto. Q: Have you engaged Zanu PF and MDC Alliance?
A: Efforts have been made to engage the president of Zimbabwe and leader of the ruling party Zanu PF (Emmerson Mnangagwa) and the president of the main opposition MDC Alliance (Nelson Chamisa). On the latter, an initial briefing has been held and on the former, we await a meeting to brief the president on our processes’ key outcomes and aspirations to contribute with solutions that can help Zimbabwe move forward.
This is in line with our strong belief in social dialogue with all players across the spectrum. In the media fraternity, Citizens’ Manifesto  met with over 30 journalists, including the Zimbabwe National Editors Forum, and had a robust conversation on how we can all contribute to a narrative that centres on peace, people-centred economic governance and participatory democracy. Q: In 2013, Zimbabwe adopted a new Constitution, what does it mean for the country’s progression towards democracy?
A: The new constitution allows citizens to exercise their human rights which are already enshrined in the Supreme Law’s Declaration of Rights in Chapter 4. It has been viewed by scholars and experts as a progressive document that empowers citizens to hold the government accountable and has the basic tenets of modern democratic constitutions such as the trias politica or principle of separation of powers, devolution, independent commissions, provision for an independent judiciary and validation of free, fair and credible elections as the basis to obtain the mandate to govern. The alignment process has been on-going with some merits and quite a number of shortfalls that still need to be addressed. The challenge falls on the State to secure the rights enshrined in this fundamental framework which should preserve the dignity of every citizen and upon citizens to know and claim their rights and exercise responsible citizenship. As one of our cardinal pillars, we say that active citizenship is about everything, every day, by everyone. Q: Historically, civil society has complained of harassment. What challenges have you met so far in terms of the operating environment? How has your work been received?
A: There are so many misconceptions about our efforts to bring forth a better Zimbabwe for all. And this is across the political spectrum. In this polarised context, we are perceived as being for or against a specific political force.  
You have seen how civic leaders are framed for conducting “treason” after attending human rights and peace building capacity processes, which any citizen is free to do, and even upon release they and their families continue to live under threat and in a state of fear. The dragnet approach in targeting civic leaders is archaic and has no place in a modern and transitional society which aspires to be open for business or anything else.
Indeed the only common enemy we are facing as a nation or as the State of Zimbabwe is poverty, global exclusion and total collapse. All energy should be focused solely on these targets which are robbing our young people of dreams and hope of any kind of liveable future. The systematic unlawful arrests and physical violence inflicted on civic leaders is a grave cause for concern. There is no way you can build a social contract which builds trust, brings healing and contributes to sustainable peace by making citizens live in fear. There is no way you will build trust and an image of being reformists in the international community when you are so violently attacking your own citizens. Q: Have you been spared in these attacks?
A: Despite being a progressive citizens’ movement offering solutions, the Citizens’ Manifesto has not been spared from the dragnet attack on civil society.  
The State media has vilified and falsely accused Citizens’ Manifesto leaders of being regime change agents on repeated occasions. Despite the harassment, events which needed police clearance have been cleared and as a result key programmes have taken place. So, for us the operating environment is not yet friendly. In the follow-up to the 2nd National Citizens’ Convention we have requested a meeting with President Mnangagwa and his team to socialise the outcomes and ideas around solutions which could provide relief to the citizens and we look forward to that meeting in the New Year. Meanwhile, the communities we have worked alongside continue to self-organise to co-create local solutions to the challenges they face. The space for citizens to meet and plan ways of improving their conditions needs to be safeguarded as a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution and many other international instruments which secure the freedoms of association and assembly. This year, we will continue to advocate that such spaces must be protected by the State so that citizens can actively participate in offering solutions to the collective challenges we face as a nation and in our communities. Q: What was your assessment of the progress of the new dispensation in 2019 with regards to the reform process and solving the various problems from the previous administration?
A: As a movement like other Zimbabweans, we actively participated in pushing for the rejection of the ways of the previous regime. But our intervention then was not to simply advance the agendas of the new dispensation. We sought to air out the frustrations of the citizens regarding the massacre of their hopes and livelihoods through maladministration and greed. As a result of our challenges we have a sizeable population that has left the country into the diaspora. 
We continue to seek and emphasise the need for a genuine break with the past. Our assessment of the (late former president Robert) Mugabe era can be summed up by saying there was serious State/Party conflation which fuelled much corruption and breaking down of critical institutions resulting in the harsh economic and social conditions. It was an era of a restricted civic and democratic space where police brutality was the order of the day. The markers of our assessment of the new dispensation remain unchanged. Unfortunately, in 2019 alone there was a sharp increase in the number of cases of political prosecution of civic and opposition actors and poverty levels have increased with a devastating social impact on the ordinary citizen. We see the challenge that the new dispensation is facing to reform the old system or to resolve the problems affecting citizens. This is why we see that the most urgent call for 2020 is to broaden the discussion beyond politics, and implore the political actors to invest in an inclusive national dialogue immediately, so that a broad spectrum of citizens from across sectors can begin to co-develop solutions which bring relief to the people and put us all on a path towards a better Zimbabwe for all. The political and economic systems must transform in order to allow citizens’ voices to be heard in both local and national platforms.  