 Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zwSHALOM and Eternity Charamba, the daughters of celebrated gospel music couple Charles and Olivia Charamba will launch their separate debut singles on July 10.  The songs were recorded last year.  “Our children will be releasing their first singles on July 10. Shalom and Eternity will release tracks Mbiri Yose and Tonamata Jesu respectively which, they recorded in May 2019. We are glad to introduce them to you as they start to lift up the name of Jesus in their own way,” the gospel power couple announced in a joint statement on Thursday.  Their father, Charles composed the songs. “For these two songs, I was the one who composed them. We are nurturing them in the music industry. In future, they will compose their songs.”  Charles is also credited for composing most of the songs on Mai Charamba’s previous albums.
Shalom 22, is the eldest in the family of five while Eternity is 17. Two are boys; Timukudze and Aveneni and, the other girl is Tagamuchira.  The Charamba daughters will release their first musical projects barely two weeks after the daughter of sungura kingpin Alick Macheso, Stacey launched her debut single Ingozi.  Stacey recorded the track without the help of her legendary father.  The songs talk of an avenging spirit that is wreaking havoc in the family, causing problems including sicknesses, fights in the family and general social upheavals which resulted in the failure of the head of the family to sleep at his home. In the song, the singer urged family members to come together to solve the problem by appeasing the spirit.  Stacy is the last daughter of Macheso and Nyadzisai. She is doing Form 3 at St John’s Chikwaka.
Macheso’s other daughters with Nyadzisai are Sharon, Monalisa and Ruvarashe.  The girls are following in the footsteps of other children of music legends, who are also into music who include Simon Chimbetu, Tryson Chimbetu, Selmor Mtukudzi, Tendai Manatsa, Tendai Chimombe and Gary Tight among others. 