Mono Mukundu To be a success in the music industry in Zimbabwe has nothing to do with gender, tribe nor language. I know it is very comforting and consoling to find something or someone to blame if one does not make a breakthrough, but the playing field is level, and with proper business acumen anybody can make it. Yes, we all know that things are bad in Zimbabwe, not only for the music industry, but for all industries, but to say one did not make it because of gender, tribe or language is a big fat lie. Looking back at our music history, hits had no language no gender barriers. I once heard someone complain why the Big 5 artists are all male. Guys being in the Big 5 is not awarded, it is gained through hard work and good business acumen and decisions. You need hits to be a crowd puller, good performances alone are not enough. I also heard some people say they did not make it because they do not sing in Shona, another big fat lie. Illanga sang mostly in Ndebele and were huge in Harare. Shosholoza was a massive hit in Harare and all we could sing was the simple chorus, how come they made it?
The same happened with Solomon Skhuza. His biggest hit was Banolila which was a massive hit in Harare and all around Zimbabwe — it was not sung in Shona, all we could sing was the simple chorus. Albert Nyathi is the most loved and most popular poet in the whole of Zimbabwe. Harare he is always mobbed by fans and his hit Senzenina was a hit all around Zimbabwe and he is not Shona. How come foreign artists who sing in foreign languages make it here like guys from DRC and South Africa? One artist that I heard complain about failing to make it because of language is a hip-hop artist. The difference between hip-hop and Dancehall with other genres is that hip-hop and Dancehall’s strength is on the lyrics, otherwise their melodies are all the same. Now with hip-hop and dancehall you have to listen to what’s being said more than you listen to the beat. Try to play a new Dancehall riddim or a new hip-hop beat as an instrumental to an ordinary person in the streets and see how many will love it, but once you add lyrics you give it meaning. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); My problem is when we take these problems and attribute them to gender, tribe and language.
The music industry is a struggle, and in every country the capital city always has better opportunities and advantages, but still that’s not a gender nor tribal issue — it’s like that for everybody and it is like that worldwide. So I really do not buy this idea of blaming gender and language, the floor is open for everyone. Tsvaga chaita musoro uteme, tsvaga chakushaisa hit and stop looking for scapegoats!