Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE United Nations (UN) has warned that global hunger is likely to increase by 80 percent before the end of this year, with Southern African countries accounting for over 19 percent of the food insecure population.  Currently, Zimbabwe has over eight million people facing starvation while the global population of food-insecure people is around 690 million.  In its latest State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World (SOFI 2020) report, the UN indicated that malnutrition and food insecurity would increase due to worsening economic crises, climate change and the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.   “Overall degradation of soil quality and agro-ecosystem conditions is furthermore leading to a general decrease in agricultural production.  “In sub-Saharan Africa, it has been predicted that as climate change affects food production, particularly through average temperature and changing rainfall patterns, the average consumer price of maize and other coarse grains could rise by 150-200 percent over a 20-year period (2010-2030) with the highest price rises to be seen in Southern Africa.  “Furthermore, widespread droughts, generated by El Niño-Southern Oscillation, will contribute to the increase in food insecurity in several countries of the Eastern and Southern Africa sub-regions, including Madagascar, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe,” read the report.  The report further indicated that Zimbabwe was among the top 50 countries with the largest number of undernourished people.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Healthy diets are unaffordable to many people, especially the poor, in every region of the world. The most conservative estimate shows they are unaffordable for more than three billion people in the world. Healthy diets are estimated to be, on average, five times more expensive than diets that meet only dietary energy needs through a starchy staple,” further read the report.  The report revealed that the Covid-19 pandemic was already delivering shocks to both the supply and demand side of food systems throughout the world thereby increasing the number of food insecure populations.   “It may only worsen in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic, emphasising the need to redouble efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) targets in the ten years remaining until 2030.  “On the demand side, the massive lockdowns across the world are expected to hamper people’s ability to access food and create serious economic downturns. This will make it difficult to afford food, particularly for the poor and vulnerable groups.  “Low and middle-income countries will likely be the most affected, as they do not have the contingency mechanisms and funds to stimulate their economies and protect the most vulnerable.  “As a consequence, a pandemic-induced global economic crisis is likely to generate new pockets of food insecurity even in countries that did not require interventions previously,” the report said.  Zimbabwe, which is a low to middle income economy, has been on a national lockdown since March 30 to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus.  The lockdown has left many in the informal sector vulnerable to starvation as their sources of livelihoods have been put on hold.