 This July another exciting collaboration between artists from South Africa and Zimbabwe took off on the Facebook page The Amavuso Project which is a multimedia performance initiative that aims to portray authentic and diverse perspectives on what’s widely known as the ‘‘blesser’’ phenomenon, as an increasingly accepted popular culture. The performance aims to give audiences a sense and feel of the interactions between “blessers” and “blessees”, exploring the pervasiveness and impact of social media. Mavuso is derived from the Zulu word vuka meaning wake-up. A few years ago the practice drew attention in some South African newspapers, including an article in the South Coast Herald: July 11, 2017 by reporter Zimasa Mgwili: Mavuso or girlfriend allowance – is it a must? The project is presented by Sibikwa Arts Centre (Johannesburg, South Africa) together with Nhimbe Trust (Bulawayo, Zimbabwe), and will be created and performed by an all-female creative team from the two countries, integrated by video footage and other digital elements, built from engagements and discussion on the page which was set up to gather society’s overall view on the subject. Questions put to the public to provoke discussion include “According to you, what is Amavuso?, What is the number one rule of Amavuso? and What is the ultimate Mavuso Package?. After online auditions, two actresses were selected from each country. The South African actresses are Dineo Komane and Eutychia Rakaki, and from Zimbabwe Donna Ncube and Charmaine Mudau.  “I am looking forward to challenging myself as an actress and to learning a few things from my fellow thespians.”
Donna said: “I love storytelling; it’s a place I call home. I am looking forward to learning, working with other enthusiasts like me.”  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Sibikwa is a visionary arts centre that promotes quality arts education, performance, vocational training and job creation in South Africa. Nhimbe Trust is a Zimbabwean NGO that works at the intersection of culture and development to foster local socio-economic development. The Amavuso Project is supported by an ANT Mobility Grant from Pro Helvetia Johannesburg financed by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC).   