 DOCTORS have raised alarm over the increasing numbers of local coronavirus (Covid-19) positive cases which are without trace, saying this is an indicator that there is an impending implosion of the virus in the country.
This comes as the country recorded 22 local cases on Wednesday with the source of infection for 21 of these being unknown while six of the country’s 20 deaths were only known after post-mortems.
Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA) secretary-general Aaron Musara said the new development was an indication that the number of local infections was higher than those that have so far been recorded.
“It has become more frequent that we receive daily updates from the ministry of Health indicating that there are more local transmissions whose sources of infection are unknown. The country’s cumulative cases had reached 1 089 by Wednesday with 395 recoveries and 20 deaths.
“The government has to find innovative ways to ensure that all existing gaps are closed to successfully mitigate the spread of the virus. We have people who are escaping from quarantine centres and are not being accounted for. We also have people who are entering the country without using the appropriate channels and are going straight home without being subjected to quarantine and isolation. He further called on the government to address the country’s economic situation and health workers’ plight.
“Covid-19 is not just about health issues, it is also related to the economy.
“The government needs to admit that the economy has redollarised and start paying health workers money that actually works. If health workers are well paid they will put more effort in ensuring that tests are done and results are quickly availed,” he said.
The Women’s Coalition in Zimbabwe (Wcoz) said there was need for the government to reinforce the public’s adherence to lockdown measures.
“In the context of the potential airborne nature of the virus, particularly in closed confined spaces adherence to proper mask wearing, sanitisation of hands and physical distancing are critical,” Wcoz said