Jeffrey Muvundusi
In BULAWAYO

THE decision by Catholic-run private hospital Mater Dei to demand exorbitant fees from coronavirus (Covid-19) patients has apparently caused a furore in the city and beyond.  The hospital is demanding US$3 000 for general ward hospitalisation as well as
US$5 000 for intensive care unit hospitalisation.  The development has attracted criticism from various quarters who feel the fees were unjustified since the health institution relied mostly on funds donated by well-wishers to set up a Covid-19 isolation and treatment centre.  About three months ago, the Medical Aid Society of Southern Africa (Masca) in conjunction with Mater Dei, launched a massive appeal for funding as the pandemic broke through the country’s borders.  However, while the hospital received a huge response from the well-wishers, according to one of its crowdfunding updates dated April 14, it’s new fees structure for Covid-19 patients has left many is shock in a country where millions are wallowing in poverty.  Many took to social media last week venting their anger on the institution over it’s decision to charge the exorbitant fees.
Pressure group Ibhetshu Likazulu’s Mbuso Fuzwayo took a dig at the hospital. “It is sad that the hospital received money from well-wishers but now they charge exorbitant fees to the same people who helped the institution. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “I feel this is outrageous considering the economic situation in our country. The fees are abnormal even in developed countries,” Fuzwayo said.  Churches and Civic Society Forum (CCSF) national chairman Englistone Sibanda had no kind words for the institution.  “It simply means that some institutions are taking advantage of the pandemic instead of co-operating in the fight and it’s unacceptable and insensitive.  “It’s a private facility and I think those who did fundraising erred. The fundraising should have been done to capacitate a public institution that serves the poor.  “Mater Dei has always been an elite institution,” Sibanda said yesterday.
Contacted for comment, Bulawayo provincial medical director Welcome Mlilo only said: “Mater Dei Hospital should answer on these issues.”  The Mater Dei administration refused to comment on the matter.
Masca chairperson Gavin Stephens, who is also the planning committee chairperson of the Catholic-run hospital, was not picking his calls yesterday and also did not respond to text messages sent to him.  Prominent lawyer David Coltart, however, chose to differ.
“One would need to know the expenses of the hospital to ascertain whether they are justified or not.  “I am aware that Mater Dei is not a profit-making institution and understand that it barely manages to break even,” Coltart said.
This comes at a time Zimbabwe had by Saturday recorded 698 confirmed cases, including 181 recoveries and eight deaths.  Meanwhile, to add to the drama, after the shocking fees being charged by Mater Dei went viral on social media, the private facility launched a manhunt to identify the person who might have leaked the information.  The hospital claimed that a nurse — Xolani Sibanda — leaked the information and threatened him with disciplinary proceedings.  In response, the nurse quit his job amid claims of being threatened and victimised for allegedly leaking a memo showing the outrageous hospital admission fees