Sindiso Mhlophe
STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THOUSANDS of Zimbabweans based in neighbouring countries and who are on anti-retroviral (ARV) treatment are in limbo after the current coronavirus travel restrictions in the region cut off their access to the critical medicines.  This comes as Zimbabwe itself is also currently experiencing ARV shortages due to the slow movement of global cargo as a result of the pandemic.  Community Working Group on Health (CWGH) director Itai Rusike told the Daily News yesterday that Zimbabweans living with HIV in neighbouring countries had been left stranded as they were no longer able to access their ARV drug supplies due to the travel restrictions in the region.   “With the closure of borders, the majority of them have not been able to collect their drugs and there is a danger of poor adherence that may result in drug resistance, thereby eroding the huge gains achieved in HIV and Aids over the last few years,” Rusike said.  This comes as the country has been experiencing nationwide shortages of ARVs.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The ministry of Health and Child Care, through the assistance of the World Health Organisation, has managed to secure 175 000 packs of ATV/r tablets used in second line anti-retroviral therapy treatment.  “The first batch of 60 000 was expected in the country by 14 July 2020 and the remainder will be ready by the end of July.  “The drugs will go a long way in averting shortages being faced in the country,” the Health ministry said at the weekend.  The permanent secretary in the ministry of Health, Gibson Mhlanga, said the shortage was due to reduced global production caused by the coronavirus pandemic.  “This circular serves to notify you that we are experiencing a national shortage of Atazanavir/ritonavir due to reduced global production and delayed shipments from suppliers as a result of the global Covid-19 lockdown restrictions.  “The ministry and its partners are working tirelessly to address this shortage. In the meantime, the ministry advises that patients on Atazanavir/ritonavir be given up to one month of supplies until the situation improves,” he said.
National Aids Council (Nac) chief executive Bernard Madzima recently confirmed the shortages but emphasised that the situation was under control as they were in the process of getting more supplies.   “In this environment of Covid-19, we do not want the HIV programme to go backward.
“Health facilities should ensure that patients get a supply of more than two or three months so that they reduce travel,” he added.  Two years ago, the government launched an ambitious US$103 million, five-year HIV-testing strategy — to raise the number of people who know their status, in a bid to build on the progress which has been made in the past decade, which saw new HIV infections in the country falling by 50 percent.  The testing strategy is part of the government’s efforts to achieve the 90-90-90 target — which seeks to have 90 percent of all people with HIV know their status, 90 percent of diagnosed people being on treatment, and 90 percent of those on treatment having suppressed levels of the virus by end of this year.