 Vasco Chaya LIFESTYLE WRITER chayav@dailynews.co.zw  THIRTY-SIX dance groups are in the running for a US$1 000 prize courtesy of the newly-launched online Dance-Off competition. The competition, which is aimed at empowering and promoting youths in the arts, is spearheaded by Mashwede Village, building on an idea by Zimdancehall chanter Enzo Ishall. Dancers’ stakeholders have expressed gratitude for the recognition of their industry at a time they felt neglected by arts promoters. This will be the first edition of the competition targeting groups in the capital. The second edition will be open to groups outside Harare. “We have been having online performances by musicians and DJs and we have decided to incorporate dancers. “This is season one of the competition and id open to groups in Harare. “Because of the lockdown restrictions, groups outside the capital will not be able to attend the grand finale,” Tendai Mashamhanda, one of the sponsors, told the Daily News. The competition will run for four weeks up to July 24 with voting platforms on Mashwede Village social media pages. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The winners will get US$1 000, runners up US$500 and US$250 for the third group. “This is all to support people of our generation. The final will be a studio set-up with the groups showcasing,” he said. Mashwede Village, together with other arts promoters, have been sponsoring online shows during the coronavirus (Covid-19)-induced lockdown. “We are there to complement others. Nash TV started something great and we also came in, adding our support to a good initiative,” he said. Mashwede Village is among one of the popular entertainment hubs in the capital and has not been spared by the lockdown. “This competition is also our way of giving back to the community that has supported us. “We are optimistic this phase will pass. So, we want the youth to unlock their creative minds and participate,” Mashamhanda said.