Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw AFTER consistent lobbying and pressure from the Daily News, Zifa yesterday finally passed a resolution to honour their promise of providing a bailout to top flight clubs as a relief package during this coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Each Premier Soccer League (PSL) team will get $360 000 (US$5 600) as a relief package to mitigate the effects of the novel virus which forced the 2020 local football season to delay its start which had been set March and up until this day. Initially Zifa, who are set to receive US$2,5 million from both Fifa and the Confederation of African Football (Caf), had set June 20 as the deadline to pay clubs and affiliates. However, that deadline went by without any payments and after relentless scrutiny from this publication, Zifa finally caved in yesterday. “The other amount that we have allocated to PSL is for the referees where the board has approved a total of $2,925 million. What this means now is when our league resumes it means there is not any PSL club that will pay the referees, it’s now the baby of Zifa. There are others like the medical equipment, we have also allocated $6,5 million. So, what it means is that it’s a cost that we have taken from the clubs. In terms of our preparations to resume the games Zifa will be responsible for that, we have set aside some funding for that. These and others will give a total of $25,675 million which has been allocated to PSL.” Kamambo said they are still hopeful of the 2020 football season finally getting off the mark in September. Zifa board member finance Philemon Machana also explained the association’s decision to make the payments in local currency instead of foreign currency. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “This is for the purpose of reporting to you (journalists). It does not mean that everything that we are going to purchase is charged in US dollars,” he said. “We will change it to Zim dollar then pay. So, the fear that it will lose value is not there because we will only start changing it at the time of using it. So, even these money (figures) that the president is giving you, if we are to pay next week for instance and the rate has changed, it means what is 6,5 today can as well be 7 million so the issue of losing value does not come in.” 