Jeffrey Muvundusi
in BULAWAYO BULAWAYO-based brand activist and conceptual strategist Godwill Tasunga believes the Covid-19 pandemic was to some extent a blessing in disguise to the artists as it has given them an opportunity to think deep outside the box and embrace the new technology. Better known as G – Factor in the arts fraternity, Tasunga is known for working with a number of local artists, with more of his attention going to the up and coming. Speaking to the Daily News, Tasunga challenged artists to have an action plan going forward as it is becoming clearer that Covid-19 will be here for a long time. Ever since the pandemic was detected in the country, artists were some of the people who were grossly affected as it meant that the live performances that were the main source of their revenues were now impossible. Government has promised to chip in with a fund to rescue some of the artists who had been thrown out of business by the pandemic. While the struggle is still on, Tasunga feels it’s high time the artists move with times. “Artists have always relied on live performances to make money. With rampant piracy, the money generated by recording songs has dwindled exponentially. With the global health crisis, live events become impossible to perform. “The result is artists are being forced to think outside the box in terms of how best they can generate revenue; they need to be more innovative. However, artists can still make music and sell pre-recorded live sessions.” Tasunga said it was now imperative that artists take virtual platforms seriously during this outbreak. “This is not the time to sit back; artists should make money during this crisis. Thinking outside the box is the only way out. Virtual platforms are the way to go. Zoom concerts; intimate sessions for 50 or less observing protocols. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Careers have always been about marketing and branding so it’s wiser if artists could create websites and drive traffic sales; add spaces like YouTube Instagram,” he further noted. Tasunga is the director of the Suzuki Summer Fashion Drive which was launched in 2019. He is also a well known socialite and fashion critic. He is a content producer, writer, actor and former radio personality.