SUNGURA musician Peter Moyo, pictured, has distanced himself from accusations that he got a residential stand from the MDC Alliance- dominated Harare City Council so he could compose political songs for the opposition party ahead of the 2023 elections.  A list of beneficiaries of the residential stands “scam” that was published in the State media yesterday include MDC Alliance officials and activists; it also includes musicians Moyo together with Braveman Chizvino aka Baba Harare and Chimurenga music star Thomas Mapfumo.  “I do not have a stand in Harare. I wish one could give it to me. I am working very hard to better my life but it’s a pity that some people try to fabricate unfounded reports just to score their own political goals. I am not a politician but a musician,” Moyo said.  “There is no way I can compose political songs. I am a musician who loves to comment on social subjects. I leave politics to politicians.”
Efforts to get comment from the former Jah Prayzah guitarist Baba Harare were fruitless as his mobile phone was not reachable yesterday by the time of going to print.  As for Mapfumo, it is public knowledge that the council offered him land as an appreciation for his artistic contribution to the city.
Director of Housing and Community Services, Admore Nhekairo in a letter seen by the Daily News and dated February 8, 2019 said:   ‘‘Please be advised that you have been selected for the allocation of a partially serviced residential Stand Number 4318 Glen Lorne, depicted on layout plan number TPF/ER/24/17 in Glen Lorne Township, Harare being a donation by the Harare City Council in recognition of your national and international contribution towards the development of the arts and culture industry in Zimbabwe.  “This allocation is subject to the satisfaction of the due process required by the prevailing Council policy and procedures on the donation of Council land to outstanding national and international luminaries in Zimbabwe.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });   Nhekairo is currently in remand facing allegations of land scandals. 