ZORA music star Leonard Zhakata this month celebrated his 52nd birthday albeit under the coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown, which did not allow him to meet and celebrate with his fans. The Daily News on Sunday Assistant Editor Maxwell Sibanda caught up with the award-winning singer who, at his peak, would sell a staggering 150 000 album copies on a single release. Q: At 52, what do you think you have achieved?
A: I believe I have impacted people’s lives positively and inspired young people to be right minded, have hope and to see a brighter future in all their endeavours. I don’t think I am totally lost in that regard. Q: Is there anything you had wanted to achieve at this age which you didn’t?
A: Personal achievements, I won’t mention, but collectively I’d have loved to see a more powerful, influential and well-organised music industry whose contribution to the GDP would make authorities take our industry serious. Q: What are some of your regrets in life?
A: Being unable to explain myself and to claim or proclaim my freedom. It seems everyone else understands Zora Music better than me. I say so because I have always had a different meaning to my songs as compared to people’s interpretations. Q: From when you released Maruva Enyika (that had the hit song Mugove) there were three to four albums that followed which turned out to be hit records; that transformation, what inspired it?
A: I think then competence ruled, good works spoke for themselves, creativity was the order of the day when it came to music but now there’s too much interference from all angles. Instead originality is being undermined; being creative is now a cause for scrutiny and persecution. Q: At the time you used to produce outstanding videos, what slowed their production?
A: When I got into the music industry, I never anticipated that fame would come my way, all I wanted was to sing for edutainment and earn a living out of my efforts but videos exposed me more.
I then thought of pushing for a quiet yet successful music career but that strategy hasn’t worked for me. In music you can’t hide behind your finger, they will identify you. So soon we will be doing videos again. Q: You have performed throughout the world; tell us about the memorable tours among these?
A: I had a good time in Britain, Deutschland (Germany) and of late SA; I really wish for the end of Covid-19 so that the good old days may come back. Q: Since the time of Maruva Enyika, how many members have you lost to death, can you name some of them?
A: I wouldn’t want to talk much about death, but let me say Zora Music is not as small as what some may perceive.
From inception to date, the institution has worked with over 200 full-time and part-time artistes, both the dead and the living. We fully appreciate every contribution made to date. Q: Who has been your most loyal band member and how long have you been together?
A: The longest serving member is Bizack Antonio, who is the band leader. I have been in the industry for 33 years and with Bizack we have been together for 31 years, the other two years he worked with Comrade Chinx together with Elliot Masimo, the late Play Chiwaya and Charles Maworere.
But we thank God we have been through tough times together, we were also happy together, we saw our children grow, some marrying some continuing with education, I respect him. Q: There is a time in reflection when your songs were deemed anti-government (then led by Robert Mugabe); do you still harbour any hard feelings about this period? What did it teach you?
A: I never developed hard feelings; in fact it was an opportunity for me to add my voice to freedom of expression as well as the freeing of the airwaves, which I did and I am happy to see so many radio stations in our country contributing positively to the development of our nation.
I also learnt many lessons from that era; I became fearless, yet on the other hand I now practice self-censorship in some of my songs. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Q: But while that was so, I understand Mugabe loved your music and that his favourite song was Nhamodzenyika. Do you think it was him or it was overzealous people around him?
A: Believe it or not the late former president Mugabe expressed himself freely and without fear, hence he knew positive criticism so well, he felt threatened by positive criticism, and so he made sure most of his positive critics are brought a bit closer, thereby silencing them technically. There is even more freedom now than then, but be careful of the long rope given by the new dispensation, you can tie yourself up. However, the not-so informed person is the most dangerous.
During those days I’d be called to perform at high profile political and military functions freely, but the grassroots was dangerous because uninformed persons could do anything from spreading hearsay or distorted information. Q: On reflection why do you think those in authority were jittery when it came to your music?
A: Let me throw this one back to you; ‘Do you think anyone was jittery’, if you think so, then he/she is the right person to ask why. Q: And then there should have been the fear of attack on your person and your family; how did you handle it?
A: It wasn’t easy, remember our fans were across the country, we used to perform even in the so- called volatile areas, yet I had false accusations hanging over my head. But the good thing is that my innocence was there for all to see, I am only an artiste with a unique way of composing, I am not a political activist, and there is zero percent radicalism genealogy in me.
Persecuting me is simply confining artistry to humdrum or monotony, I am not the last born of poetic music in Zimbabwe. There is need for creativity to grow across all genres in our country. Why should we fight our own?
Remember what defines the uniqueness of an artiste is mainly his/her voice and lyrical content. Q: You once talked of your role in the liberation struggle as a child; have the ideals of what you fought for at the time being realised.
A: Partly yes, partly no, we are a developing nation, we still have a long way to go, but the good thing is we are on the right track.
There is democracy in Zimbabwe and everyone has to prove their worth for them to get a political office. What is wrong is using bloodshed and torture, other strategies are not as bad. Q: How many albums have you released so far?
A: To me it’s not about numbers, but the impact created, so far I have released only 21 albums. Q: When should we expect the next album? How many songs does it have; any name to it so far and what subjects do you cover?
A: Most likely as soon as concerts are allowed, but we also value the safety of our supporters, so we will be strictly monitoring this Covid-19 disease.
I am not sure on the number of songs, because it depends on the important messages we intend to give at the given season.
As usual Zora Music is about love, peace and harmony, justice and fairness, it inspires and gives courage, it touches on yesterday, today and tomorrow. Q: How long has been your marriage to Ruth and how many children do you have? What are their names and what are they doing?
A: So many years in marriage, we have four children — Chamu Lionel, Angela Leossa, Petula Pepukai and Kanotonga Lennon.
Chamu did his 1st degree at Africa University, Angela did her accounting degree in China, Petula is doing law in SA and Lennon is doing lower 6. Q: Are any of your children following your footsteps as a musician?
A: Not sure yet, but I don’t think so, because fame is not preferred by blood.
We love our fans so much but my children feel like their dad has been a victim of high profile persecutions and they don’t like fame.
But I believe Lennon, Angela and Petula can sing but Chamu has made sure I do not hear him sing even once, so I don’t know if he is able to sing. Q: Am sure you were caught unawares by the Covid-19 outbreak; how has this affected your artistic career and the welfare of your band?
A: Like everyone else we were all caught unawares, but I had to pick the positives out of it. I got the opportunity to refresh my old engineering profession; fitting and turning.
I am regaining the momentum. Musically I got enough time to do script writing and lyrical corrections.
On the welfare of band members, I always encourage our members to have an alternative source of income in case the music well runs dry, so it helped this time around but we miss our life of being together with our supporters. Q: Have you considered performing online?
A: We had made an arrangement for our inaugural online performance, but unfortunately something happened and we couldn’t fulfil, but it’s a good way to continue interacting with fans as well as reaching out to more. Q: From your own perspective, what do you think should be the political way forward for Zimbabwe? Are you supportive of a government of national unity?
A: I am not a politician but as a citizen I have the right to give an opinion on issues to do with our country. In 1980 we had a Government of National Unity, we saw progress. In 1987 we had Zanu PF and PF Zapu uniting, and we experienced peace, unity and progress.
In 2008 we had another government of national unity, it defused tensions and again we saw a bit of progress. Now we don’t have serious tensions, but we need to fight the economic war together. Can’t we just come together and share ideas? Millions are suffering economically yet it only takes less than 200 people to agree to work together. Where is the love for the people if I may ask?