Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw  THE government has told nervous investors that the country remained a safe destination for business, notwithstanding the chaos that was caused by last week’s suspension of trading on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange (ZSE), the Daily News reports.  This comes as economists have warned that the country is shooting itself in the foot by implementing ill-advised policy decisions such as ordering the closure of trading on the ZSE and suspending mobile money platforms.  It also comes as the country is experiencing its worst economic crisis in a decade, which has triggered restlessness among long-suffering Zimbabweans.  Speaking during a post-Cabinet media briefing in Harare on Tuesday, Finance minister Mthuli Ncube said investors had nothing to worry about as the government had suspended the ZSE to clean up the system and restore investor confidence.  “The Zimbabwe Stock Exchange was suspended along with agent and merchant lines on mobile platforms, and this was for the same, if not similar reasons which have to do with certain transactions that were being conducted through the platforms bordering on illicit financial transactions. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “So, we have instituted investigations and these investigations are on-going. The ZSE will open once these investigations have been completed, or when we feel that it is no longer necessary to continue with the suspension.  “As such, Zimbabwe is open for business, but it is not open for money laundering and illicit financial flows,” Ncube said.  “What you saw was a regulatory intervention to investigate and try to understand the criminality and suspicion of illicit financial flows, including money laundering,” he added.  Ncube also said investors and stockbrokers should be patient as the suspension was not different from the inconvenience experienced during long weekends and holidays.  However, top economists have warned that the moves were ill-advised and would scare away much-needed investment.  “The government has been pushing the agenda that Zimbabwe is open for business.
“However, the government’s inconsistency in policy implementation and reforms paints a picture that the country is not open for business to potential investors.  “Zimbabwe has already placed itself at the bottom of the list of contenders when it comes to attracting investors.
“Suspending the ZSE, is just the government shooting itself in the foot,” veteran economist John Robertson told the Daily News yesterday.  Fellow top economist, Tony Hawkins, also said the government’s decision was reminiscent of the 2008 era when the ZSE was also shut down.  “The belief that a country with 786 percent inflation can have a stable currency is misplaced, as is the belief that it is possible to control money supply under these circumstances.  “Money supply is growing faster this year than last year, which means that it is off to the races for both inflation and the exchange rate.  “While it is impossible to guess the length of the piece of string, it can be said with confidence that it is getting shorter,” Hawkins told the Daily News