CONGOLESE singer Desolo B has described Zimbabwe as his second home where he has found a career and love, resulting in him starting a family. Born Makula Marlos, the 27-year-old is a pastor’s son who started his career in church where he played instruments. In Zimbabwe he is pursuing a musical career in afro-fusion fused with rhumba, a trademark from his home country. He said he is the only one pursuing a different career path in his family. When he came here, Desolo B initially pursued his church roots, working with local prophets before joining Allan Chimbetu as a guitarist. He also had a dalliance with urban grooves star Roki as a backing vocalist and guitarist. As it stands he has an album titled Nakupenda to his name. He is also lining up a singles’ collection for this year.
His message revolves around the subject of love, hence the title for his debut album. Desolo B has worked with other local singers, among them Andy Muridzo, Bev, Soul Jah Love and Ti Gonzi. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Desolo remembers superstar Oliver Mtukudzi. “Tuku was an icon and I had the opportunity of working with him. I met him at HICC at the Fally Ipupa show and he invited me to his offices. He treated me like a son and would allow me time at his studio. I made him listen to my debut album, Nakupenda, and he suggested that we re-record three tracks. He has had highlights in his career including sharing the stage with Koffi Olomide and Werrason. “When Kofi came, I performed with him at Long Cheng. I also shared the stage with him at HICC. I told him about my recording plans with Tuku and he was thrilled. He told me that Tuku was big name in African music,” he said. Desolo B is enjoying a wider audience with his fluency in Swahili, Lingala, French, English and Shona. “My goal is to reach a wide audience and language is helping me. My wife has taught me Shona and this has helped me in a big way. I fuse Shona with Lingala, Swahili and French and this makes my music unique,” he said.