COMEDIENNE and singer Felistas Maruta aka Mai Titi says she was used and dumped in the United Kingdom (UK) by ex-boyfriend Blessed Zingwe aka Zizoe who she had helped secure a travelling visa. Mai Titi, who recently celebrated her 34th birthday, said she has since forgiven Zizoe, 25, who had been issued a UK visa on the strength that he was her backing vocalist.  Initially she had committed herself to helping uplift the upcoming musician. Owing to their pronounced age difference, the celebrity couple endured criticism from society but they both turned a deaf ear. “When we arrived in the UK, the first days were okay. I got 24 contracts with people paying. It was quite a busy schedule for me; I was booked for weddings, baby showers and kitchen parties, among others. I fulfilled only three shows and the rest were affected by the outbreak of coronavirus. I had to refund all the unfulfilled shows; it was a huge loss for me,” she said. Mai Titi claims she caught Zizoe red-handed with a girl just a few days after landing in Europe. The following morning Mai Titi phoned her cousin to come and pick her up, telling her she was not feeling well. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Most of my relatives are in England as well. Imagine if I had no relatives in the UK what would have happened. That was when I left Zizoe and his family.” While at her cousin’s house, Mai Titi sought clarification with Zizoe pertaining to the identity of the woman in question. The eccentric comedienne revealed how the 25-year old musician tried in vain to sweet-talk her to have a baby with him. “After all has been said and done, he tried to comfort me sarcastically. He said: ‘No Mai Mukweso (we have a duet together by the name Mukweso, so we used to address each other by that name) we can continue to be together but you should understand I have a future with that lady as we are of the same age. You will be my second wife.’ I was really shocked. I was depressed. Imagine hearing that nonsense from the person you loved the most.” While at her cousin’s home, Zizoe’s brother called and ordered Mai Titi to come and collect her belongings. “My cousin drove me there and I decided not to leave the car. She collected the goods for me with Zizoe enjoying the entire drama from an upstairs window. That was how I was treated by those guys in the UK. They kicked me out of their home, imagine how bad that was. At first, I felt that was the end of me. However, being strong as I am, I got up on my feet, started recording and I am happy that the situation inspired me to write many songs, with some of them now being played on Trace Africa TV and Channel O, among others.” Already she has some confirmed collaborations with big names in the music industry like Patoranking and Yondo Sisters, among others. “Watch this space!” she said. The good thing is that Mai Titi has forgiven Zizoe and his family. “Everything happened for a reason. I believe the UK tour was not meant for me to assist Zizoe to cross into the UK but it was God’s special way of telling me to revisit my music career. Remember, I started off as a musician before comedy. So I take it (the UK experience) as a blessing in disguise. When she arrived in the country from the UK, leaving Zizoe behind, she went into quarantine in line with the Covid-19 regulations. The singer ventured into music at the age of 18. She is the proud mother of two daughters, Felisha and Tanatswa, who is simply known as Titi.
She singled out comedy and music as her main sources of revenue. “These two avenues work hand in hand and I cannot say comedy is more paying than music or vice versa. As a comedienne and musician, I get bookings at high profile functions and I have worked with a number of corporates pushing their brands. Iko kutopengereka kwangu kuya paFacebook ndiko kunobva mari yangu (my rantings on Facebook are making money for me). I have a shop at Joina City that sells women wear and apart from the shop I am into buying and selling. I sell literally everything that is saleable. I am also into counselling. Born and bred in Harare, she has an album “Zvandapihwa Nashe” under her name and several commercially successful singles like “Utange Neni”, “Makatendeka, Dzora Mwoyo”, “Kereke Dhukeke”, “Ndinouya Ikoko”, “I Miss You”, “Dzoka Undinyepere” and “Letting You Go” featuring Kazz Khalif, among others.  WATCH VIDEO:    