WHILE the rest of the world is grappling with the effects of coronavirus (Covid-19), which has resulted in the death of over 552 000 people worldwide and the collapse of major economies,  Zimbabwe is, in addition to tackling the pandemic, confronted by yet another crisis —   discontented frontline health care workers, including nurses and doctors. Placards inscribed with messages directed at the government including “NO US$ NO WORK, Hatizvidi, Ngazviende (we don’t want this, it must stop), Enough is Enough, Health has gone to the DOGS! Mari haichakwana kubhadhara rent (we can no longer afford to pay rent), have become synonymous with nurses who are on strike over poor remuneration and working conditions. Their major demand is to be paid their salaries in United States (US) dollars or at the prevailing parallel market rate, owing to the rapid deterioration of the Zimbabwe dollar on the black market. With month-on-month inflation nearing 100 percent, Zimbabwe’s economy continues to decline, and the tremors are being felt everywhere as evidenced by soaring prices of basic commodities, long queues outside banks and fuel stations, cash and foreign currency shortages. Nurses are pressing the government for change through strikes and demonstrations, demanding better salaries, badly needed hospital supplies, functioning medical equipment and, in light of Covid-19, personal protective equipment (PPE). They insist that if the government does not address these concerns, they will not return to  work. On the other hand, the government is adamant that it has no foreign currency to pay the nurses and other civil servants. Zimbabwe Professional Nurses Union (ZPNU) secretary-general Douglas Chikobvu told the Daily News on Sunday that nurses in the country were living in a deplorable state and in abject poverty. He further indicated that in light of the Covid-19 pandemic, nurses in many hospitals lacked personal protective equipment such as surgical face masks and scrubs, exposing them to the lethal virus. This comes as the country’s confirmed Covid-19 cases are now above 900, including over 300 recoveries and 12 deaths. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Local cases have also been soaring, with healthcare workers, including nurses, testing positive through their interaction with patients infected with the killer virus. “We believe that the government should be practical in addressing the heart-breaking and saddening plight of nurses because it is a critical service we offer. “The government should try to award nurses a decent salary in US dollars and also a graded risk allowance based on exposure, not this one size fits all approach of US$75 being implemented across the board. That’s ridiculous,” Chikobvu said. The government last month offered all civil servants a blanket 50 percent salary increase and US$75 Covid-19 allowances valid for three months. Finance minister Mthuli Ncube indicated that the government would not pay the US$75 allowance in cash, but would deposit it in Nostro accounts. Zimbabwe Nurses Association (Zina) president Enock Dongo said nurses were willing to engage in a “fruitful” dialogue with the government to end the on-going strike. The government has in the past resorted to firing striking nurses, vowing to replace them with newly-trained and retired nurses. Last year, Vice President Constantino Chiwenga dismissed 16 000 nurses in his capacity as the supervisor of the government social services cluster. In a statement, Chiwenga indicated that the Health Services Board (HSB) had conceded to the nurses’ demands by releasing over $17 million to the Health ministry to pay outstanding allowances for nurses who were on strike “What makes the whole action deplorable and reprehensible is the fact that as agreed, the government released and transferred $17,114.446 into the account of the Ministry of Health and Child Care for on-payment to the striking nurses. “While this demonstrates good faith on the part of government, the prompt transfers which have been effected against demonstrable economic challenges facing the country has not, quite surprisingly, persuaded the striking nurses to go back to their stations in the interest of saving lives and helping helpless patients under their care. “The government now regards this lack of remorse as politically motivated and thus as going beyond concerns of conditions of service and worker welfare,” he said then. This time around, the government is adamant that it does not have the foreign currency to pay nurses and other civil servants, due to the severity of the economic crisis. Acting Health and Child Care minister Amon Murwira told the Daily News on Sunday that the only way to solve the problem of striking health workers, including nurses, was to engage in dialogue. Asked if the government has the capacity to meet the nurses’ demand to be paid in US dollars, Murwira said there was need to give dialogue and team work a chance to find the most practical route for the good of the national health system. While strikes in the health sector date back to the later former president Robert Mugabe era, in 2018 under President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s “new dispensation”, the situation in public hospitals deteriorated and reached breaking point, prompting nurses, doctors and other health workers to down tools and demand better working conditions and remuneration. To date, their demands have not been met, leaving the country’s health sector in a shambles as the two conflicting parties are failing to devise a mutually beneficial solution. 