PAMELA Fulton has literally lived all her life on the triathlon track, first as an athlete and later as a development coach. To cap off her fine career, Fulton has now scaled to the top of her sport after her recent elevation to the post of Triathlon Zimbabwe (TZ) vice-chairperson. Fulton’s dedication and commitment to triathlon saw her being selected to take part in the inaugural Women’s Sport Leadership Academy (Wsla) at the University of Hertfordshire in England last November. Unfortunately for her, disaster struck mid-way through her English jaunt after the untimely death of her mother, Daphne Chalmers (80), here in Zimbabwe. As a result, Fulton had to cut short her trip and return to Zimbabwe to be close to her family during the difficult times. Fulton’s journey to becoming a respectable triathlon coach was born out of a solid base in which she has been a leading athlete in Zimbabwe and Africa. Being married to Rick, a former TZ president, meant Fulton had to be a perfectionist in her sporting conduct.
This, however, has helped her as she is now slowly moving into leadership roles within TZ. Fulton’s desire is to see the sport continuing to blossom, creating new avenues and career pathways for upcoming and established triathletes. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “At this stage I’m quite content being a part of the management team adding value wherever I can.”
With such an illustrious and storied journey in triathlon, Fulton is proud of the path she has walked. “I’ve been fortunate to experience many highs in my triathlon career. A couple that come to mind from my racing days were firstly when I became an Ironman by completing the 2001 Cape Town Ironman, placing third in my category,” she said. “Another memorable moment was when I came out of retirement eight years later and represented Zimbabwe at the age of 40 at the 2011 Maputo Africa Games, finishing sixth. “There are so many highs from my coaching career but a few of them include being nominated to accompany the Zimbabwean triathletes to the Youth Olympic Games in Nanjing, China. What an amazing experience the Olympics are. “Being with the team at the 2019 Africa Games where our ladies won silver and bronze was a very exciting moment. Travelling on from the Africa Games, accompanying Andie Kuipers to the grand finale, Lausanne, Switzerland where she had qualified to compete in the elite U19 category, was a special moment for us both. “Witnessing our team of juniors win silver in the senior mixed team relay event at the 2019 Africa Championships was one of the most exciting events I’ve ever seen. There are so many highs to choose from.” 