DESPERATE Zimbabweans have launched an online petition to nudge President Emmerson Mnangagwa and Nelson Chamisa towards talks, the Daily News reports. The petition, which was started by youth activist Moses Machipisa, has already attracted 2 400 signatures — and is 1 100 shy of the target that was set for it to be presented to Mnangagwa and Chamisa. This comes as Zimbabweans are experiencing increasingly tougher economic hardships, as the prices of basic goods continue to skyrocket. “The economy is crumbling and there is a lot of economic, political and social instability in the country. “If the situation continues unresolved, the country will be thrown into further chaos and unrest. “We are calling upon all progressive Zimbabweans to sign this petition for a National Unity Dialogue between Emmerson Mnangagwa and Nelson Chamisa, with input from the business community, … church … civil society … the youth and citizens for them to put their differences aside, unite and work together in a power sharing arrangement such as a government of national unity for the sake of peace, development and a secure future for all Zimbabweans,” the petition reads in part. This comes as both Mnangagwa and Chamisa have previously said they are open to dialogue, although nothing concrete has happened — primarily because of differences over the form and platform on which the talks should take place. On his part, Mnangagwa has demanded that any talks with Chamisa should be held under the Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) — where he regularly holds meetings with fringe opposition leaders. Chamisa has ruled out joining Polad — demanding direct dialogue with Mnangagwa instead.
Both men also appeared ready to finally end their brawling when former South African leader Thabo Mbeki held talks with them last year, over the worsening economic rot. Mbeki — who helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between former opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and Robert Mugabe, who are both late — was in the country in December, to try and push Mnangagwa and Chamisa to hold direct talks. More and more people have added their voices in recent weeks to the growing calls for dialogue between the two men. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Former Zanu PF spokesperson Rugare Gumbo told the Daily News last week that only dialogue would save the country from imploding, as the government was failing to put the country’s economy back on the rails. Gumbo buttressed what Zanu PF politburo member Tshinga Dube had said earlier when he called on Mnangagwa to form a government of national (GNU) with the opposition to end the country’s myriad challenges. In 2009, the late former president Robert Mugabe was forced into forming a government of national unity with MDC founding father Morgan Tsvangirai after the hotly-disputed 2008 polls. The much-loved Tsvangirai beat Mugabe hands down in those polls.
However, the results of the elections were withheld for six long weeks by stunned authorities — amid widespread allegations of ballot tampering and fraud, which were later confirmed by former Zanu PF bigwigs. In the ensuing sham presidential run-off, which authorities claimed was needed to determine the winner, Zanu PF apparatchiks engaged in an orgy of violence in which hundreds of Tsvangirai’s supporters were killed — forcing the popular former prime minister in the inclusive government to withdraw from the discredited race altogether.