Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zw HARARE mayor Herbert Gomba, pictured, has been arrested on allegations involving land scams and abuse of office as a public officer.  Gomba was picked up from his Glen Norah home on Tuesday night and is expected to appear in court today.
Police spokesperson Paul Nyathi yesterday directed questions on the arrest of Gomba to the Anti-Corruption Unit in the President and Cabinet’s Office.  The head of the unit, Thabani Mpofu, confirmed Gomba’s arrest, but did not divulge intricate details, referring the Daily News back to the police. “Gomba was arrested by the ZRP (Zimbabwe Republic Police). We have not been favoured with all the details of the case though,” Mpofu said.  The mayor’s arrest follows hard on the heels the apprehension of other top council officials over land scams that have rocked the Harare City Council.  Senior officials arrested included acting human resources director Matthew Marara and principal housing director Edgar Dzehonye, who were accused of prejudicing the council of US$1 million in Kuwadzana stands allocation deals. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  The Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission also arrested housing director Addmore Nhekairo on allegations of corruptly offering housing stands to public officials, among them a magistrate, prosecutor and senior and junior cops. He was on Tuesday denied bail.  The State alleged the public officials, who were offered stands, were undeserving and not on the housing waiting list and that they were handling a land scam relating to the council and that Nhekairo had criminally abused his office by issuing council land without following proper procedures.  The matter sucked in police officers and a prosecutor who have since appeared in court on allegations of receiving the stands offer.  On the other hand, Marara together with Aaron Tayerera are facing allegations of fraud and were also denied bail on Tuesday.  The two are alleged to have identified an open space in Strathaven which they demarcated to create a stand which was given a fictitious stand number.  The stand is alleged to have been disposed of through a real estate agent to an unsuspecting land seeker.
It is alleged that they created an offer letter and an agreement of sale which was backdated to 2017 which was aimed at covering up the offence.  The court heard that the offence was discovered by the council through a tip-off and preliminary investigations revealed that the two flouted procedures.  The two are alleged to have prejudiced the council of US$14 400.