 Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zwMAGAMBA TV in conjunction with Bustop Tv have launched a school of satire in Harare meant to promote and develop the genre, the Daily News reports.  “We have seen more and more of young content creators and satirists who use humour to speak truth to power. So as Magamba TV and Bustop TV we thought it was really important to be able to have a school or platform that can help incubate a new generation of satirists,” Samm Monro aka Cde Fatso said.  Cde Fatso is happy with the number of upcoming artists joining the creative industry.
“When we started our Zambezi News Show around 2011, it was the country’s first ever political satire. Of late, Bustop TV have established themselves as one of the most relevant and biggest political satire outfits in Zimbabwe,” he said.  The school which is located at Moto Republic in the capital is already calling on students to apply.  “We have put out a call for applications from young content creators, satirists and comedians and we are hoping to have our first students enrolled in next few weeks,” Monro said.  The semester will run for three months.  “So far we are starting with 15 students who will be taught by experienced content creators, online marketing experts and other gurus in the comedy industry,” he said  The school will empower students by giving them capital after graduation.  “We do not charge students for lessons as the programme is meant to assist youngsters. Actually we have start-up capital to give to students after they have undergone mentorship,” he said.  For one to enrol at the school he/she should have passion in the satire and arts sector in general.
Bustop TV is made up of Luckie Aaron, Samantha ‘‘Gonyeti’’ Kureya and Sharon Chideu (Magi). The crew also features other comedians including Boss Kedha.  The continent boasts of political satirists in the form of the Ugandan comedian Teacher Mpamire who is famous for mimicking the Ugandan president Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and other stand-up comedians such as South Africa’s Trevor Noah among others.