Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zwCOMBATIVE MDC Alliance vice chairperson, Job “Wiwa” Sikhala, has once again warned that the country is on the edge — adding that frustrated Zimbabweans could soon rise against the government, the Daily News reports. This comes as Zimbabwe is currently in the grip of its worst economic crisis in a decade, which is stirring anger and restlessness among long-suffering citizens. It also comes as there are growing calls for President Emmerson Mnangagwa and Nelson Chamisa to bury their long-running political feud to extricate the country from its deepening crises. In a statement at the weekend, Sikhala said Zimbabweans had had enough of their suffering, and were now waiting for a signal from the country’s political leadership to hold mass protests. “This time, the wave will be unstoppable. I don’t make empty threats. I am not that character. I am a practical man. We deserve our peace and happiness,” he added. The firebrand lawyer-cum-politician also reiterated that he had been placed on “round-the-clock surveillance” by fearful authorities, but would not be deterred in participating in demonstrations. “Let me be unequivocal. I will not tolerate any persecution of my person anymore … I have mobilised the people to trigger a revolution in the event that they carry out their threats against me. “I will never be persecuted because of my resolute stance against this evil regime. My Masvingo treason trial will be a picnic.“People governing our country should take responsibility for their failures. Trying to use other people as scapegoats is dangerous to their (the government’s) very survival,” Sikhala said further. This comes as Zimbabweans are reeling from the effects of the country’s dying economy, which has triggered panic and fears of a return to the horror situation of 2008. Despite being feted like a king when he replaced the late former president Robert Mugabe, following the nonagenarian’s stunning ouster by the military in the widely supported November 2017 putsch, Mnangagwa and his government have found the task of repairing the country’s broken economy tough. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); To underline how troubled the economy has become, last month, the government all but signalled a return to dollarisation — after under pressure Finance minister Mthuli Ncube awarded civil servants and pensioners’ allowances in US dollars. In 2008, Zimbabwe binned its worthless currency and introduced the multi-currency system, which was anchored by the US dollar. Despite this system having served the country well for more than a decade, Ncube rattled the markets in June last year when he prematurely and ill-advisedly ended the local use of the US dollar and other foreign currencies. And as the economy continues to tank, more and more people are imploring Mnangagwa and Chamisa to end their brawling, which stemmed from the disputed 2018 presidential election. At the weekend, expelled former Zanu PF youth leader, Godfrey Tsenengamu, said Mnangagwa and Chamisa had terribly let down ordinary people by failing to end their long running rift. Speaking to the Daily News’ sister publication, the Daily News On Sunday in an exclusive interview, Tsenengamu — who now leads the anti-corruption pressure group, the Front for Economic Emancipation  in Zimbabwe (Feez) — also said it was time that Mnangagwa took decisive action against rampant public sector corruption. “At first, I thought the failure (by Mnangagwa and Chamisa to dialogue) was because of some hardliners in both parties, but now it seems it is just because of the egos and arrogance of the leaders. “They want to continue to score cheap points against each other. I blame both for their political grandstanding at one point or the other. “They are proving to be selfish and uncaring for the suffering masses,” Tsenengamu let rip. “I thought that they were going to put Zimbabwe first, but it seems their personal and party interests come first before Zimbabweans. “I believe that both may at some point look back with regret at the chances they so abused. It is just a matter of time. “We are a divided and polarised people who subscribe to toxic politics, which is characterised by hate, vengeance, insults and mistrust. “Zimbabwe now requires leaders more than politicians and leaders are in short supply,” Tsenengamu further told the Daily News On Sunday. “Those supposedly in leadership across the political divide continue to want to score cheap points against one another and it is very sad and unfortunate. “I believe in unity and oneness. Unity is power. As far as I know, Zanu PF can do without the MDC and the MDC can do without Zanu PF. But Zimbabwe can’t do without all her children. “Unfortunately, our leaders don’t see it that way,” the fearless Tsenengamu added.