AWAY from the glitz and glamour of international cricket Brendan Taylor is proving to be a generous giver due to the acts of kindness he is showing. Whenever he has an opportunity, the former Zimbabwe Test captain has often strived to make a difference by helping out where he can in a small way. Recently, Taylor handed over a donation of clothes to Eat Out Movement in Harare, a social impact organisation that seeks to find sustainable solutions in ending homelessness. Taylor delivered two suitcases full of winter apparel that the organisation will hand over to the less fortunate. “This is an initiative that’s very important; these wonderful people make a big difference to the communities that are a lot less privileged than we are,” Taylor told the Daily News on Sunday. “They go around just making sure that young kids are taken care of and there’s accommodation, food and clothing provided. This is just a small gesture to try and keep a few young kids warm over winter since it’s a bit cold at the moment. “This is an easier thing for me to do and I think the people here deserve all the credit because they really are changing lives and making lives for the better in these trying times.” Two years ago, Taylor donated necessities to the paediatric ward and burns unit at Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals. “Kids have a soft spot to me and most people and I’m a parent as well. Especially during this pandemic and this tough time there’s a lot of people that are struggling. They don’t have funds to go and purchase some winter clothes,” Taylor added. “I just hope this will go a long way and make sure they just keep nice, warm and comfortable and keep the cold out and not get ill and fall sick with the flu. Kids are always a soft spot for I’m glad I can do a bit to assist.” The 34-year-old wicketkeeper-batsman is keen to set up a foundation of his own to assist mainly disadvantaged and vulnerable kids in the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “I think so, definitely when cricket finishes I wanna start putting some wheels in motion now and certainly that’s the benefit of being a sportsman. You can really rally around and get some support behind you to make a real difference,” he said. “So a lot of effort goes a long way in our community. They are bigger things to come and certainly try and make a big difference in terms of the communities that are less privileged and children definitely are close to my heart.”
Eat Out Movement chief executive Henry Chigama said Taylor’s exemplary gesture should go a long way in bringing on board more like-minded athletes, individuals and organisations alike. “We cater for groups such as people living on the streets, people living in the squatter camps, children’s homes or places which are not permanent homes. It’s an amazing feeling (donation from Taylor) it shows that the work that we are doing people are recognising…people are seeing a worthy cause in what we are doing,” Chigama said. “When you have people like BT coming in and recognising what we are doing it puts a very solid stamp on the work that we are doing and we hope that a lot of people can also follow suit and be able to come and assist. “We do have quite a number of different resources that require from small to big that is clothes, groceries all the basics, land as an organisation we are now trying to establishing sustainable programmes for our beneficiaries and we need things like land, monetary assistance is also welcome even skills people just taking their time to come and assist us in our outreaches.” Meanwhile, Taylor is hopeful the scheduled August visit by Afghanistan will go ahead as planned despite the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. Zimbabwe Cricket has already seen the lucrative home series against India being called off due to the novel virus. “The post-Covid-19 training has been good, it has been tough. A lot of physical training (and) back in the nets as well had a good few sessions with Steue (Stuart Matsikenyeri batting coach),” he said. “Obviously, we’re dying to get back out there and hope Afghanistan will come; obviously there’s been some few disappointments in terms of tours being postponed. Those are the things we can’t control so we just try to get ready and hopefully if they come we just want to be as prepared as we can. “A worrying factor in our training- those were two very big tours that we would have loved to be a part of but fortunately they have been postponed and not cancelled so I think it’s gonna happen at some point and that’s important. We can’t afford to lose tours like that.”