Austin Karonga
SPORTS WRITER
karongaa@dailynews.co.zw FC PLATINUM goalkeeper and captain Petros Mhari is already thinking of his next step when he finally calls time on his illustrious playing career. Although goalkeepers normally have more years in the game than outfield players, the 33-year-old Mhari has set his sights on becoming a good goalkeepers’ coach once he retires. Mhari made his top flight debut as a 17-year-old striker for Zimbabwe Saints in 2000 while still in high school at Sobukhazi. The following year he was transformed from a striker to a goalkeeper accidentally when he was asked to stand in for the team’s goalie who had missed a training session. From there on, he has never looked back and has emerged to be one of the top goal minders in domestic football.
Following Saints’ relegation and demise, Mhari moved to Zvishavane side Shabanie Mine in 2007 where he warmed the bench throughout the season and never played a single match. However, he was spotted by Hwange assistant coach Nation Dube in 2008 while playing for Shangani FC and played for the Colliery side between 2009 and 2012. Then his crowning moment came in 2013 when he found his way back to Zvishavane to join FC Platinum.
He made an immediate impact winning the 2014 Independence Cup, the Chibuku Super Cup and the Zimbabwe National Army Charity Cup that same year. He was made club captain in 2015 to date and has raked up 245 appearances for Pure Platinum Play during a period in which the club has completely dominated Zimbabwean football. Mhari and FC Platinum have won the Castle Lager Premiership title for the past three seasons to establish themselves as a true domestic giant. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The Zvishavane-based side has also managed to qualify for the African Champions League group stages for the past two years as they have begun making inroads on the continental front. Before the start of the 2020 season was cancelled due to the spread of coronavirus (Covid-19), Pure Platinum Play has already added the Castle Challenge Cup trophy into their cabinet after beating Highlanders in March.