THE coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic continues to destabilise Zimbabwe’s major economic sectors while exposing pre-existing weaknesses in the health system, acording to a recent report from the African Development Bank (AFDB).  The deadly coronavirus has so far affected over 1 000 people and killed 20 in the country as of yesterday.   Nurses and other health care workers have since embarked on a strike owing to poor remuneration and unavailability of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).  The report further indicated that while the regional bank had previously projected that Zimbabwe’s economy would grow by 4,6 percent this year and 5,6 percent in 2021 if corrective measures were taken, the economy was expected to shrink by 8,5 percent this year owing to the Covid-19 pandemic.  “Recovery was expected in agriculture and mining, backed by increased and well-targeted investment. But production is now expected to fall in both sectors, largely due to the outbreak of the pandemic and associated shocks and policy actions to limit the infections. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “And reductions in tourism earnings will exacerbate foreign exchange shortages. As a result, the economy is projected in 2020 to contract by between 7,5 percent if the pandemic subsides by July (baseline) and 8,5 percent if it continues through December (worst case), with modest recoveries in 2021,” further read the report.  Recently, Finance minister Mthuli Ncube issued an impassioned plea to international finance institutions, laying bare the country’s battered economy and saying it faced “catastrophe” if it did not access critical bailout funding to fight the combined impact of crippling drought and the coronavirus pandemic.  In a leaked letter Ncube said without transformative arrears’ clearance and re-engagement plan, Zimbabwe could “suffer a health and economic catastrophe” and the economy could contract by as much as 20 percent.
The regional bank further indicated the country’s inflation was projected to average 217 percent in 2020, amplified by the Covid-19-induced shocks.