OPINION BLACK  EDWARD  Poverty-weary Zimbabwean youths are very bitter. The bitterness stems from lack of opportunities to lead minimally decent lives because of inept leadership. And the underperforming leaders further inflame this bitterness by bleeding the economy through looting and amassing obscene wealth. However, the youths must not feel doomed — there’s hope as some of the enlightened leaders have noted this massive and endemic corruption. When a problem is identified, it puts the leaders under an obligation to find solutions and we expect the State to do everything at its disposal to serve its citizens. The Zimbabwe Defence Forces commander, General Philip Valerio Sibanda, recently said that the level of corruption displayed by some of the country’s leaders is tantamount to selling out. The youths are trying very hard to make ends meet and are crying out for help daily. “I graduated three years ago and have been unemployed ever since. With the cost of living increasing daily, my family can only afford one proper meal per week. I just don’t know what to do,” said Takudzwa from Epworth, scrounging for food. I always get a huge lump in my throat and struggle to hold back tears when accosted by total strangers in the streets, like Takudzwa, who pour their hearts out to me. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Thanks to second-hand clothes bales, some can still dress somewhat decently.
The incompetent “chefs” are clueless and can’t do anything to pacify the poverty-stricken youths. They operate without goals or objectives and so have nothing to achieve but to just plunder the country’s resources. With the August 1, 2018 shootings still fresh in their minds the youths say they are cowed into silence by the leadership they claim is always ready to spring into action using security forces to deal with them ruthlessly. “The system is cunning and evil — it has turned some people into propagandists, political prostitutes and bootlickers. It doesn’t brook anyone questioning its actions,” said Alvin from Glen View.
However, this is the time for the leadership to begin to invest in the youths so as to bolster the future. For a start, they can combine their efforts in seeking ways to implement simple but useful projects at community level and later on get involved in high-impact ones. Planning, organising, controlling, directing and staffing are crucial for the projects to succeed as thriving initiatives can actually act as springboards for future leadership. Nothing is impossible. There is so much talent and potential among the youths. 
These young people can get together and come up with innovative strategies — utilising their vast technical and intellectual abilities — for the country’s and their benefit. Instead of spending lots of time bemoaning the failures of the government without taking action, they can actually prove their worth by making substantial contributions in research, agricultural and business development.  