Austin Karonga
SPORTS WRITER
karongaa@dailynews.co.zwFIRE Queens and Soweto Girls football teams, both based in the Mt Hampden area, at the weekend received a donation of footballs from Oracle Sport.  The Mt Hampden area has at least 15 junior girls football clubs and has been at the centre of attention ever since the Daily News broke the story of goalkeeper Primrose Ranjisi last year.  Ranjisi received US$1 after winning the player of the tournament award and the story quickly went viral as Zimbabwe rallied to offer support to the girls’ teams.  During the hand-over ceremony of the equipment, Oracle Sport marketing executive Blessing Chikadaga said she was on a fact-finding mission to secure more sustainable solutions for Fire Queens and Soweto Girls. “Basically we are here to try and understand how we can help the talented girls achieve their dreams because we were touched by the story written by the Daily News,” Chikadaga said.  “We then spoke to Zifa president Felton Kamambo about this trip and he gladly gave us footballs to donate to the girls and promised to help them further after understanding what is needed once football is given the green light to resume by the Sports and Recreation Commission post the Covid-19 pandemic.”  The teams are in need of footballs, football boots, playing kit and a formalised league for their area since they have enough teams to convene a division.  The teams’ captains also appealed for well-wishers to help them with sanitary wear since most of them come from impoverished farming communities.   “We are aware of their existence ever since the news of the US$1 reward broke out, you would recall that we also had our women football representative Theresa Maguraushe present during that tournament and she also made a report to her committee,” Kamambo told the Daily News.  “We are going to assist them in every way possible and without a doubt as we speak right now we have uniforms that we intent to hand over to them while we work on other needs.”