Sindiso Mlophe and Jeffrey Mvundusi  ALARM bells are ringing in government over the rapid surge of coronavirus infections in the country, which health experts warn could soon spiral out of control, the Daily News On Sunday reports.  At the same time, there are also growing fears by authorities in Bulawayo that the country’s second city is the new epicentre of the lethal virus — after it recorded 231 cases in one day, the highest since the outbreak of Covid-19 in Zimbabwe.  This comes as authorities are preparing to further tighten the national coronavirus lockdown, in response to the rising deaths and infections in the country.  So far, 23 people have succumbed to the deadly disease — which has infected nearly 1 400 others.
Worryingly, most of the deaths that have been recorded this month were only linked to coronavirus during post-mortems.  The acting Health minister, Amon Murwira, told the Daily News On Sunday yesterday that the increase in local transmissions was also a sign that the lethal virus had now run amok. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “The exponential increase of the country’s confirmed Covid-19 cases are very worrying and terrifying at the same time, given that we are now recording more locally transmitted cases.  “It is indicative of the fact that the virus has infiltrated our communities and now more than ever is the time that we must unite in order to stop the situation from further escalating.  “The next few weeks are going to be critical as we are likely to see the numbers escalating further,” Murwira told the Daily News On Sunday.  “An increase in local transmissions is also indicative of the fact that people are now disregarding the rules and regulations of the national lockdown meant to mitigate the spread of the virus.  “What we are saying is that people need to continue observing social distancing, sanitising or washing their hands with soap, staying at home and avoiding unnecessary movement.  “This cannot be over-emphasised. People need to start acting like they are paranoid,” Murwira said further.  “What this means is that you need to look at the next person as if he or she has the virus and then be able to observe all regulations meant to mitigate the spread of the virus, or to look at yourself as if you have the virus and stop mingling with people in order to protect them from the virus,” he added.  Meanwhile, medical experts have once again implored the government to increase testing and surveillance to mitigate the spread of coronavirus in the country.  The secretary general of the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR), Norman Matara, said the rise in local transmissions was very worrying.  “It is also worrying to note that some of the cases are being discovered only after a post-mortem has been carried out.  “It means that our testing system is lagging behind and our surveillance system is a bit weak.  “We need to strengthen our surveillance systems by increasing the number of people being tested in the community, as well as conduct a robust contact tracing process.   “The government has been trying to upgrade facilities across the country to be able to deal with Covid-19, but there are problems in terms of the supply of consumables such as test kits and PPE.
“The government needs to avail adequate consumables for testing so that results are issued as soon as possible.
“The provision of PPE is also key as it will protect medical practitioners from the virus.
“For now, I would say we are not yet capacitated to handle a surge and the government ought to urgently address this matter,” Nyaguse said.  On his part, the mayor of Bulawayo — Solomon Mguni — told the Daily News On Sunday yesterday that situation in the city was getting out of hand.  “This is getting out of hand and we seem to be becoming the epicentre of this pandemic in Zimbabwe.
“What is worrying us as city authorities now more than before is the fact that 90 percent of the new infections are local transmissions.  “This really points to the lockdown fatigue and indiscipline in so far as observance of the Covid-19 regulations is concerned,” he said.  Bulawayo provincial medical director, Welcome Mlilo, concurred with Mguni.  “Certainly, we are witnessing what may be called ‘lockdown fatigue’, with residents no longer observing lockdown regulations and the infection prevention and control measures articulated by the ministry of Health,” he said. 