Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Zimbabwe yesterday made an urgent call for the nation to channel resources to put to an end soaring cases of gender-based violence (GBV) and child abuse, amid the growing threat of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. This comes as the UNFPA State of the World Population 2020 report estimates that this year, there would be a significant increase in cases of GBV and child marriages due to the Covid-19 pandemic, which has forced women and children to be stuck in spaces with perpetrators of abuse. Speaking during the launch of the UNFPA State of the World Population 2020 report online yesterday, UNFPA Zimbabwe country representative Esther Muia said harmful practices against women and girls cause profound and lasting trauma, robbing them of their right to reach their full potential in socio-economic development. “These figures are not only true for the globe but for Zimbabwe as well and this calls for urgent action to put an end to harmful practices against women and girls. We must prioritise the protection of women and girls and create opportunities so that they participate in socio-economic and political spaces,” she added. Muia further said that there was a need for the government to ensure that laws, designed to protect women and children, are enforced without fear and favour. Speaking at the same event, European Union (EU) ambassador to Zimbabwe Timo Olkkonen said the coronavirus pandemic has worsened GBV and child abuse and calls for more effort to end the scourge. This comes as the national GBV response station has recorded a 90 percent increase in cases of GBV for the lockdown period as compared to pre-lockdown. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Women Affairs ministry permanent secretary Melusi Matshiya said in efforts to minimise GBV, the government had declared social workers as essential services. “We have declared people who work to protect children and women as essential service to boost the fight against GBV and child abuse,” Matshiya said.