Blessings Mashaya SENIOR STAFF WRITER mashayab@dailynews.co.zw SUSPECTED State security agents raided the home of Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU) president Peter Mutasa on Sunday night, harassing his petrified family, the Daily News reports. This comes after the homes of MDC deputy national chairperson Job Sikhala and expelled Zanu PF youth commissar Godfrey Tsenengamu were also raided at the weekend. It also comes as political temperatures continue to rise in the country ahead of planned July 31 mass demonstrations. Mutasa told the Daily News yesterday that he had been traumatised by the raid on his home in Harare’s Kuwadzana suburb on Sunday night. “They then started to harass the family demanding that they tell them where I was. They took my brother and nephew with them but they managed to escape after shouting very loudly to alert the neighbours. “After being disturbed by the neighbours, the men went to the car park and punctured all my car tyres. “They obviously wanted to immobilise me badly because they then came back in a white Quantum and pretended to be lost, seeking directions,” Mutasa further told the Daily News. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The ZCTU boss said he had made a report to the police, adding that he was, however, not deterred from fighting for the rights of workers. Police spokesperson Paul Nyathi said he was not aware of the raid on Mutasa’s house. This comes as suspected State agents raided the homes of Sikhala and Tsenengamu at the weekend, as political tensions rise ahead of the planned mass demonstrations slated for month-end. A concerned Tsenengamu told the Daily News at the weekend that three armed men visited his home in Bindura on Saturday night — whereupon they proceeded to harass his wife and children. “They demanded to know my whereabouts and they were told I had left for Harare. They only left at around 1am,” he added. Tsenengamu — who now leads the anti-corruption pressure group, the Front for Economic Emancipation (FEE) — said Bindura police had subsequently told him that he was not wanted for any offence. Sikhala also told the Daily News that suspected State security agents had visited his Chitungwiza home in the wee hours of Saturday, using an unmarked red vehicle. He said the men had a major confrontation with his security team, before leaving in a huff after being resisted robustly.