Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw THE Chinese embassy in Zimbabwe yesterday availed US$2 million to fund the post-Cyclone Idai recovery project in efforts to rebuild homes and public infrastructure that was destroyed when disaster struck in Manicaland Province in March last year. This comes as over 224 families are living in shelters while 346 are homeless in the cyclone-hit areas of Chipinge and Chimanimani and are facing increased vulnerability to the deadly coronavirus (Covid-19). The recovery project, which would be administered by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in partnership with the Local Government ministry, will recruit at least 60 community builders and carpenters to rebuild 237 rural housing units, seven clinics and eight clinic staff houses, 66 toilets for 46 schools and 30 classroom blocks. China’s ambassador to Zimbabwe, Guo Shaochun, said unity of purpose and adequate funding were key in rebuilding the communities. “We all know that Cyclone Idai battered the eastern part of Zimbabwe last year, especially Chimanimani and Chipinge districts, causing deaths, unprecedented destruction to infrastructure, properties and livelihoods. “The Chinese government and UNDP have been maintaining good cooperation and coordination in Zimbabwe and other parts of the world. I believe our cooperation on this project will make its implementation more efficient and benefit the local people as early as possible,” Guo said. Guo further indicated that China was also keen on assisting Zimbabwe’s response to the global threat of the Covid-19 pandemic. “Covid-19 is a common challenge we are now facing and only by strengthening solidarity and cooperation can humanity overcome it. “Here, I would like to announce that in about 10 days, China will donate another 30 000 test kits to Zimbabwe. Although conditions are tough right now, we are committed to making every effort to keep those major bilateral projects on track because we know they are important to Zimbabwe’s economy and the well-being of Zimbabwean people,” Guo added. Speaking at the same event, Local Government minister July Moyo said the funding came at an opportune time to fast track dealing with the residual effects of Cyclone Idai. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “The project will engage the local communities in which a significant amount of work will be conducted using available local human and material resources. “The government of Zimbabwe learnt one big lesson from Cyclone Idai — that you cannot just settle people haphazardly. To address some of the challenges in Chimanimani and Chipinge, the government undertook some geo-spatial surveys which resulted in four places being identified as suitable for resettling the affected communities. “These are West End Farm, the Flats, Nhedziwa and Green Mount all in Chimanimani District. I urge you to go and build at those surveyed places, Moyo said. “The US$2 million mobilised by UNDP under the South-South Cooperation Assistance is in addition to US$500 000 support that UNDP has already implemented in partnership with CARE Zimbabwe,” he added. Cyclone Idai which hit the country in March 2019, caused the death of over 800 people and displacement of over 50 000 households.