SIX lucky members from Nhimbe Trust’s Women in Theatre & Television programme who each received a Covid-19 digital resilience grant of $2 500 have since successfully utilised the money to upgrade their projects. Feedback from recipients showed that the grants were efficiently and effectively utilised.
Getrude Munhamo said the Digital Resilience support has indeed gone a long way in opening opportunities for her to create and work.  Dalma Chiwereva said she is super excited and very grateful for the grant as it helped her through some projects that she had shelved. “I managed to pay for studio time and my project is in post-production and I’m expecting it to be out soon. So I’m really grateful for that. The grant came through for me to be able to move from one place to another, it took care of some of my transport costs and enabled me to go for other recordings that I previously could not manage since there were financial constraints.   She added that having the grant eased some of the frustrations and pains that artists are going through. Agnes Bonakele Moyo said she has been able to develop her social pages and is preparing for small interviews which she will post online. Her further challenge is the need for a good phone and camera for recording, and she is hoping to find a better solution with time. Otherwise, she says: “The grants have helped me stay connected and to be finding ways of developing myself.” Lady Tshawe, who was also closely involved with the Bulawayo Arts Festival in the first week of June, signed up for several online courses to enhance her skills, including a piano course. This builds on her introduction to the instrument in the Nhimbe WiTT programme some years ago. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); She said: “I have also managed to put together collaborations with directors from Zimbabwe and outside the country to work on monologues which we will be posting online over time.  Nomathamsanqa Mkwananzi said: “The situation of course is not so easy, just being home, but I’m getting things done where I am. I’m normally based in Germany and everything now is just being done online; so I’ve managed to communicate with people I work with in various countries.   “So it’s been really helpful. I have also been able to upload my new music video on YouTube and promote it on a daily basis. So of course my YouTube channel has grown from 150 to 528 subscribers all because I’m always online and posting new stuff as far as my music is concerned. I’m growing my Facebook page while also advancing my German language online. All this would have been difficult without the grant. It’s been really, really helpful.”