Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zw AS THE government prepares to tighten the ongoing national coronavirus lockdown, political analysts say authorities need to balance the need to save lives with economic interests, the Daily News reports.  In addition, the analysts say any new tougher measures should not be used as an excuse to clamp down on government critics.  This comes as more and more Zimbabweans are succumbing to the lethal coronavirus, whose death toll reached 20 yesterday.  Respected University of Zimbabwe political science lecturer, Eldred Masunungure, told the Daily News yesterday that the government needed to give equal attention to lives and livelihoods.  “We must emulate South Africa on tightening the lockdown, but there is a need to increase awareness campaigns so that people know what is happening and so that there is buy-in.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “There is also a need for security agents to be in residential areas, to communicate with people, and they must use their batons as a last resort,” he said.  But Namibia-based scholar, Admire Mare, warned against the country emulating everything that South Africa had done.   “But equally important is ramping up efforts around contact tracing and quarantine centres.
“Whilst tightening the lockdown and imposing a curfew is something worth considering, in Zimbabwe there is fear that it can be used to lock down livelihoods and political freedoms.  “Our responses must be context specific and balance the need to save lives and also the urgent need to improve people’s livelihoods,” Mare said.  This comes as rights groups have said that authorities have been found wanting on many fronts with regards to their preparedness for Covid-19.   “Local transmissions with no known source present a major challenge.
“In addition, the government should continue to insist on social distancing measures and the use of masks in public spaces,” Human Rights Watch director for southern Africa, Dewa Mavhinga, said.  “Many cases are going unnoticed because of lack of testing. Without proper and massive testing and tracing of contacts, lockdowns or curfews will not be very effective.  “Also, the government should ensure all citizens have access to clean water and adequate public transport to prevent overcrowding,” Mavhinga further told the Daily News  All this comes as 20 people have succumbed to the deadly virus, amid concerns over rising cases of local transmissions.  So far, more than 1 000 people have contracted Covid-19, although health experts say the figure is probably understated.  According to World Health Organisation (WHO), the coronavirus comes from a large family of viruses that cause illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases.  Its symptoms include pneumonia, high fever, flu, shortness of breath and diarrhoea — and the precautions that have to be taken include covering your mouth when coughing and sneezing, and continuously washing one’s hands.  