Vasco Chaya
LIFESTYLE WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zwZIMBABWE Music Rights Association (Zimura) has paid $0,75 each to  five musicians in royalties while the highest paid singer got $40 000, the Daily News reports.  Zimura said it paid a total of $2 million to musicians this week.
“Musicians are getting 10 times or more than what they got last year, though the value is less as compared to last year. The highest paid musician got around $40 000 while the lowest got $0.75,” Zimura executive director Polisile Ncube-Chimhini said.  When a song is played on Star FM the musician gets $0,75 per play while ZBC pays $5,31.
“Though $0,75 was the minimum, as an organisation we do not send out such figures; we do not distribute such amounts to the responsible musicians. This year, only about five musicians were at the minimum.”  There are also a number of musicians whose songs were never played on radio or in the clubs for a whole year; hence these musicians got nothing.  Each year on June 1, the musicians’ revenue collecting agency pays artists money according to the success of their songs on radio stations and clubs among other public places.  However, due to the debilitating effects of coronavirus pandemic in the society, this year’s payment process was delayed to July 1.  Zimura has a membership of about 3 167 and has the mandate to protect and promote rights of music composers, authors and publishers,  Last year, Zimura paid royalties to about 2 500 musicians with the highest pocketing
$5 000 while at least 700 musicians got nothing. Over the years, the music rights organisation and State broadcaster ZBC have fought over the refusal by the latter to pay for the songs played on its stations.  The organisation has in the past claimed receiving threats from government after they wanted to effect a High Court order to attach State broadcaster ZBC property over outstanding royalties.  The High Court once granted Zimura an order to attach 15 ZBC vehicles to pay off the 2009-2010 debt which had accumulated to $707 421, 13.