Afritractors is Zimbabwe’s sole distributor for Farmtrac, one of the market leaders in the Tractor Segment in the world, based on the previous renowned Ford Models DNA.It is Manufactured by Escorts Group, India’s third largest tractor manufacturer and  the world’s top ten. The 20-113hp Farmtrac range has been on the Zimbabwean Market since 2018.    Farmtrac range of Tractors covers the 22HP to 90Hp .We boast about having stock at any given time.The compact tractors range is from 20 to 35 HP, utility from 30 to 75 HP, narrow from 60 to 90 HP and higher segment tractors from 80 – 110HP.   According to Afritractors Zimbabwe,Farmtrac was the perfect addition to broaden the range available in the tractor market for small holdings, small farms, equestrian centres, contractors,Municipalities, Mines,Educational Institutions and large estates in Zimbabwe.  Gareth Evans, The Managing Director at Afritractors Zimbabwe says: “We are confident we have brought to the Zimbabwean market a tractor range that is designed to offer performance and value while being simple and intuitive to operate. Farmtrac products deliver on all these points and more.” Custom manufactured for world farmers, Farmtrac tractors are cost efficient high-end machines with state of the art technology. These tractors have the edge of unchallenged fuel economy backed by zero RPM drop in the engine, lifting capacity up to 3000 kg, cold start ability at -15˚ C and special features for even muddy operations.  The tractors incorporate word class components including transmissions designed and produced by Carraro and hydraulic systems from MITA, to deliver a superior performance whether cultivating soil, mowing or towing trailers.  The engines are designed to meet the relevant emission standards. All models feature independent rear PTO, and mid PTO is available on tractors equipped with HST transmission.With a reputation for durability, Farmtrac tractors offer unbeatable value which is demonstrated by the use of the best components in the world and assembled by highly-skilled engineers.  AFTER SALES SERVICES In order to keep your tractor working perfectly, we offer Farmtrac genuine spare parts at affordable prices  at the Afritractors showroom in Harare. Our team of experienced mechanics are available to service and repair Farmtrac tractors too. We have made it a point that major components are readily available so as to reduce the downtime of our Farmers in the field.  The addition of Escorts Construction Equipment to the Afritractors portfolio has seen the company expand its sectors of interest into the Construction Equipment Segment as well.  Afritractors welcomes our valued customers to our premises at Gate 4 Harare Showgrounds , Rekayi Tangwena Avenue , to take a look at the variety of our stock on the ground.  CONTACT US WHATSAAP       +263775 295 617 CALLS               +263772 130 254/5