Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zwPRESIDENT Emmerson Mnangagwa hinted yesterday that authorities would tighten the ongoing national coronavirus lockdown — in the wake of rising deaths and infections in the country, the Daily News reports.  This comes as medical experts have expressed concern over an upsurge in locally-transmitted cases of the deadly virus, which has now killed 12 people and left more than 900 others infected.  It also comes as Zimbabwe recorded 98 cases of people infected with the disease on Wednesday — its single biggest figure in a day since the country reported its first case in March.Speaking during Zanu PF’s politburo meeting in Harare yesterday, Mnangagwa said he was concerned by the rising coronavirus infections and deaths in the country. “On the health side, the strategies we adopted to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic have to date yielded positive results.  “The recent rapid spike of infections requires that we make another review of the Covid-19 lockdown measures,” he said.  This comes as Zimbabwe is currently under an extended lockdown, which authorities recently relaxed after positive signs of the containment of the lethal virus.  As part of fortifying the lockdown, the government has put in place several new regulations, which — among other things — criminalise public gatherings and the non-wearing of face masks in public.  The secretary-general of the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR), Norman Matara, warned yesterday that the next few weeks would be defining for the country.   “From what I have gathered the two deaths recorded at Sally Mugabe actually occurred in the community and were then taken to the hospital where it was confirmed that they had the virus.  “Once the disease is in the community that means that we will see a rapid increase, especially in our communities where people are found in long queues waiting for Zupco buses, to withdraw money or to access water at boreholes,” Matara told the Daily News.  “This spells doom for us because on one hand we have increasing Covid-19 cases while on the other we have health workers who have downed tools.  “The government should address nurses’ demands which are genuine.  “The money we are getting given the country’s economic environment is not making sense. So, the government needs to urgently attend to this issue before it gets out of hand,” Matara added.  According to World Health Organisation (WHO), the coronavirus comes from a large family of viruses that cause illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases.  Its symptoms include pneumonia, high fever, flu, shortness of breath and diarrhoea — and the precautions that have to be taken include covering your mouth when coughing and sneezing, and continuously washing one’s hands.