Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw HARARE giants Dynamos are in no rush to make any appointments in their technical department to replace assistant coach Biggie Zuze following his untimely death last month. Zuze, who was a father figure in the DeMbare dressing room, passed away in Harare last month after suffering a pulmonary (lung) clot which resulted in his heart stopping. The former DeMbare midfielder, who was 56 at the time of his death, was buried in his home town of Bindura.
His death means Dynamos coach Tonderai Ndiraya will now have to look for a new assistant to fill the void. At the moment, Ndiraya is being deputised by Naison Muchekela, who joined the club at the start of the year, and goalkeepers’ coach Gift Muzadzi. DeMbare chairperson Isiah Mupfurutsa said they are still in mourning and a decision on a replacement will be made in due course. The DeMbare boss said once the time is right to appoint Zuze’s replacement; the club will have to follow Ndiraya’s lead. “The issue of assistant coach rests with the head coach. If he wants to beef up, we are ready to support him in everything,” he said. “If he says he wants a replacement now we will engage his preferred candidate. So, we will wait to hear from the coach. “This is not an easy process remember the coach needs enough time to choose the right personnel.
“But like I always say, if he comes today and says I want a new assistant we are always prepared to engage whoever he wants to work with.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); DeMbare were looking forward to the 2020 Castle Lager Premiership season with a lot promise after they invested heavily in rebuilding the side which finished 10th last season. Boosted by the financial support from their shirt sponsor Gold Leaf Tobacco through their Remington Gold brand, the Glamour Boys signed virtually a new team. DeMbare made Partson Jaure (Manica Diamonds), Nkosi Mhlanga (Yadah FC), Lennox Mutsetse and Tanaka Chidhobha (FC Platinum U19) their early signings. The Glamour Boys also brought in goalkeeper Taimon Mvula from Hwange as well as the former ZPC Kariba duo of defender Sylvester Appiah and winger Tino Chiunye. DeMbare also signed winger Barnabas Mushunje from Ngezi Platinum Stars, midfielder Juan Mutudza from Herentals, strikers Albert Eonde from FC Platinum, David Temwanjira and King Nadolo from TelOne FC.
With such a huge outlay in new arrivals, the Harare giants were being considered as possible title contenders. However, the 2020 campaign was halted before a ball had even been kicked due to the coronavirus after the government declared a nationwide lockdown since March 30. Football authorities are now pushing for a September kickoff to the season after Zifa last week announced a bailout package for local clubs.