Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zwTHE United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is concerned by the sharp increase in violence against women and children during Zimbabwe’s current national coronavirus lockdown, the Daily News reports.  This comes as authorities are preparing to further tighten the lockdown, in the wake of rising coronavirus deaths and infections in the country.  In a report, OCHA said gender-based violence (GBV) had increased by 70 percent between March — when the lockdown was first announced — and June, with children suffering sexual abuse the most.  “GBV threats continue to intensify in scale and scope, while the population is exposed to degenerating food insecurity — compounded by economic hardship and the Covid-19 movement restriction measures.  “The national GBV Hotline (Musasa) has recorded a total of 2 768 GBV calls from the beginning of the lockdown on March 30 until June 13 … with an overall average increase of over 70 percent compared to the pre-lockdown trends.  “About 94 percent of the cases are women. The most dominant forms are physical violence (38 percent of total cases) and psychological violence (38 percent), followed by economic violence (19 percent) and sexual violence (five percent).   “Of the 418 cases reported through the child helpline this week, 45 percent were GBV and violence against children cases — with sexual abuse cases constituting the majority of the cases.  “The helpline data also indicates that girls are more vulnerable to sexual abuse than boys.  “Women and children are also facing access challenges because of the cost of transportation in urban areas, lack of public transport in rural areas, access fees for certain medication such as anti-retroviral drugs (ARV), stigma and teasing at roadblocks, especially for sensitive services such as post-rape care,” OCHA said.  Meanwhile, the Women’s Coalition in Zimbabwe (Wcoz) said while the government had recognised access to GBV services as essential, reports indicated that survivors were still facing challenges in accessing the service due to restrictions in movement. “Our networks have further highlighted that the full re-operationalisation of GBV facilities continues to face challenges regarding availability of basic Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Covid-19 supplies.  “We, therefore, urge prioritisation of resourcing the GBV services and safe shelters. We further urge gender integration in the planning and implementation of the Covid-19 preparedness and response measures,” it said.  All this comes as there has been an increase globally in the number of cases of domestic violence and various forms of gender-based violence.  In April this year, local churches also raised concern over the increase in the number of domestic violence cases in Zimbabwe.