Blessings Mashaya
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mashayab@dailynews.co.zw AMID rising tension in the country ahead of the planned anti-government mass protests slated for month-end, there is a fresh call for President Emmerson Mnangagwa to engage with his political rivals to help fix Zimbabwe’s myriad crises, the Daily News reports. This comes as Mnangagwa’s government has come under intense pressure to take urgent steps to mitigate the country’s worsening economic rot. It also comes as churches and other organisations are ramping up their push for Mnangagwa and his political foes to put the country’s interests ahead of their personal or party ones. Now, and amid the recent strong warnings by authorities that they would ruthlessly crush the planned July 31 mass protests, expelled former Zanu PF legislator Killer Zivhu has once again implored Mnangagwa and MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa to hold urgent talks to avoid bloody clashes in the country. In an audio recording that has gone viral, the former Chivi South legislator said Mnangagwa and Chamisa needed to forestall the planned protests and also hold dialogue. “Let all people come together as political parties … for us to build Zimbabwe.
“No matter how best the president (Mnangagwa) will try, it’s very difficult for him to achieve as all his efforts will be derailed because vamwe vanenge vachidira jecha (some people will be throwing spanners in the works),” he added.
Zivhu warned against the planned July 31 demonstrations, arguing that any confrontational approach to the country’s problems would only serve to damage the nation’s reputation further. Ironically, the former ruling party MP was cut loose from Zanu PF and Parliament after he implored First Lady Auxillia Mnangagwa and Chamisa’s wife, Sithokozile, last year to get their husbands to talk directly — in an effort to resolve Zimbabwe’s seemingly intractable problems. Zivhu, then, said the idea for Auxillia and Sithokozile to mediate in the country’s political impasse had come from villagers in Chivi South, where poverty and hopelessness were “intensifying”. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He also said his constituents did not understand why the country’s two main political leaders could not sit down and engage in dialogue — adding that this was the reason why the villagers now wanted their wives to intervene. Zivhu said further that the bid to include the two ladies in the resolution of Zimbabwe’s challenges made sense as both Auxillia and Sithokozile — like most women — wielded great influence in their homes and in the country, and particularly because they were also their respective husbands’ most trusted and closest political allies. He was immediately suspended from Zanu PF activities before he was eventually jettisoned from both the party and Parliament last month. In the new audio, Zivhu said those who were planning to demonstrate could not remove a constitutionally-elected government from power through protests. He joins several other high-profile people and groups who have been urging Mnangagwa to heed their calls and end his long-drawn feud with Chamisa for the benefit of long-suffering Zimbabweans. Last month, respected Zanu PF founder and former Cabinet minister, Rugare Gumbo, also implored the two protagonists to set aside their differences and hold talks to save the country from descending into total chaos. This followed a similar call by another former Cabinet minister and Zanu PF politburo member, Tshinga Dube, who said only talks would end the country’s myriad challenges. Both Chamisa and Mnangagwa have previously said that they were interested in dialogue, although nothing concrete has happened — primarily because of differences over the form and platform on which the talks should take place. On his part, Mnangagwa has been consistent that any talks with Chamisa should be held under the Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) — where he regularly holds meetings with fringe opposition leaders.
Chamisa himself has repeatedly ruled out joining Polad — demanding instead direct dialogue with Mnangagwa. At one time, both men appeared ready to finally end their brawling when former South African leader Thabo Mbeki held talks with them last year over the country’s worsening economic rot. Mbeki — who helped to broker the stability-inducing 2008 government of national unity between former opposition giant Morgan Tsvangirai and Robert Mugabe, who are both late — was in the country in December last year, to try and nudge Mnangagwa and Chamisa to hold direct talks.