The soaring levels of unemployment in the country as well as the operational restrictions in the informal sector as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic has left a number of people without a source of income to sustain themselves as well as their families. This has seen an increase in the number of home burglaries as well as burglaries on business premises. It has become very important for property owners to ensure that they are protected from these unfortunate and avoidable incidences.      Home and property security is very important as has been evidenced by an increase in the demand for security measures to protect property, be it residential or business. With the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), security systems have now become a living part and extension of the user. Imagine going away from home and still being able to know the environment of your home just by glancing at your smartphone or tablet. Even at home, you no longer need to leave the comfort of your protected space to go out and investigate what is happening outside… you can see the activity from the connected IoT devices. Sentinel Security was founded in 2011 as a Security Consultancy Company focusing mainly on Fraud and Security Risk Services, Physical Security Management (policies, procedures and awareness) and Cyber Crime and Security advisory. With the passing of time, the company diversified into technical security systems, with Sentinel Security Technology division taking shape in 2014. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Our aim at Sentinel is for our customers to head towards a secure world and we are here to help you achieve a secure world for you, your loved ones and your precious valuables. Contact us on +263242006157, +263772568361 (call and WhatsApp), email info@sentinel.co.zw . You can also visit us online through our website www.sentinel.co.zw, Facebook @SentinelZW01 and Twitter @SentinelZW. We look forward to being a part of your secure world.   