Nigel Matongorere
SPORTS EDITOR
matongoreren@dailynews.co.zw THE Premier Soccer League (PSL) could be handed a bailout after the Confederation of African Football (Caf) announced it was looking at financing the domestic leagues of its member associations (MAs). Initially, the 2020 Castle Lager Premiership season should have commenced in March but those plans had to be shelved due to the global spread of the coronavirus (Covid-19). Since March 30, Zimbabwe has been in a nationwide lockdown with health officials trying to curb the spread of the novel virus. As of yesterday, the country had recorded four deaths from the 149 confirmed cases. The coronavirus has presented an unprecedented health risk for sports and in some of the countries where they have resumed football activities; they are following strict medical guidelines. For instance, players and staff are being tested regularly before and after training sessions and matches.
The games are also taking place behind closed doors with no paying fans allowed anywhere near the venues. Away teams usually book two players in a single room while on the road but due to coronavirus, this is no longer possible with a single person getting their own hotel room. Due to social distancing protocols, the sizes of changing rooms and dugouts have had to be significantly increased as well. However, implementing these drastic health protocols can be a huge financial challenge for teams on the continent as all this costs a lot of money. Even here in Zimbabwe, most top flight clubs are already on the brink of collapse as they usually rely on gate takings to fund their operations. Asking local teams to host their home games behind closed doors would be a financial death sentence.
Caf is fully aware of such scenarios on the continent and this is the reason the Cairo-based organisation is looking at funding league competitions in all the 54 countries on the continent. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Earlier this week, the PSL had announced that its Medical Committee was drafting regulations that would see football’s resumption. “The PSL Sports Medicine Committee will work in liaison with club medical doctors. The draft procedures will be shared with the Sports and Recreation Commission, Zifa and other relevant stakeholders. “These procedures will be continuously reviewed and updated in accordance with the general health situation in the country and recommendations from the health authorities.” In an interview with the Daily News shortly after the PSL’s announcement, Ngezi Platinum Stars chairperson Silence Gavi said local clubs would not be able to afford to finance the medical protocols.
“Take testing for example, a single RDT costs US$25-30 while a PCR test costs US$65 in the private sector.
“Tell me which club can afford these before training and before matches at all times? Another question is frequency of testing, how often is adequate to ensure acceptable safety for players and officials? What’s the reliability of the tests and what’s the duration of validity the tests? “Changing room sizes will definitely be another headache in light of physical distancing protocols. These are rooms already built with no plans for Covid-19 in mind so how do we accommodate Covid without compromising either player safety or team ethos?’’ FC Platinum were crowned Castle Lager Premiership champions for a third consecutive time last year. The 2020 season is yet to kick-off due to the coronavirus outbreak.