By Nigel Matongorere SPORTS EDITOR  ©️ DARK clouds are hanging over the Felton Kamambo-led Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) board after the government last night said they are following recent events in Trinidad and Tobago where Fifa recently installed a normalisation committee.  This comes as the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) revealed to the Daily News that they have a team which is studying the events in the Caribbean island. “Our team is still studying the facts at how Fifa reached such a decision of appointing a normalisation committee in Trinidad and Tobago.   In August last year, the SRC tried to disband the Zifa board after a number of transgressions by the Kamambo-led board. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); This was after the disastrous 2019 Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) tournament in which Zimbabwe attracted negative headlines due to Zifa’s bungling. Despite the government raising funds for the Warriors coupled with the grants Zifa received from the Confederation of African Football (Caf), the team still went on strike over unpaid allowances and appearance fees. The Warriors threatened to boycott the opening game against hosts Egypt before the intervention of Caf and the government to break the impasse.   There are also allegations that Kamambo also took his family members and church pastor to the Afcon finals while some of the councillors provided seats for their girlfriends on the charter flight. With a payment dispute overshadowing the team, it was no surprise as the Warriors crashed out of the tournament in the group stages following a humiliating 4-0 defeat to the Democratic Republic of Congo. Zifa is also sitting on a US$7 million debt that has dogged the association for the past decade and has resulted in most of its property going under the hammer. Kamambo has also been dogged by allegations of bribing councillors on his way to beating his predecessor Philip Chiyangwa during the December 2018 elections with police now investigating the case. It was under such circumstances that the SRC had tried to disband Zifa but the move was blocked by Fifa. However, events happening over 10 000km away in the Caribbean could have a ripple effect here in Zimbabwe. “The Bureau of the Fifa Council has … decided to appoint a normalisation committee for the TTFA…the decision follows the recent Fifa/Concacaf fact-finding mission to Trinidad and Tobago to assess, together with an independent auditor, the financial situation of TTFA,” Fifa said when they disbanded TTFA board led by William Wallace.   People in Trinidad and Tobago are now querying Fifa’s stance on TTFA considering the current prevailing situation at Zifa. “Credit to Wallace and his team because who in their right frame of mind would take on the mighty Fifa? Now, why would Fifa want to solve this dispute when they very well have orchestrated the heavy-handed imposition of this normalisation committee to suit their own purpose?” Colin Murray wrote in a scathing opinion piece in the Trinidad and Tobago Guardian yesterday titled Fifa’s dirty hypocrisy — Bailout Zimbabwe but ‘normalise’ T&T?. “This is the same Fifa that has recently agreed to bail out Zifa of its US$10 million debt…this bailout is in addition to the US$1 million grant that Fifa issues the association annually. “The TTFA’s debt is roughly US$2,6 million less than the Zifa debt but they send a normalisation committee here in T&T. Somebody, please help me with the maths here but I suppose it has nothing to do with maths, does it? You see, justice must not only be done but seen to be done. There is no justice here.”  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms.Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw . 