Mugove Tafirenyika
and Sindiso Mhlophe
STAFF WRITERS ©️ THERE is growing concern over the rising positive cases of the lethal coronavirus in the country, which is attributed to returning residents — prompting authorities to scale up surveillance at quarantine centres, the Daily News reports. This comes as a number of returning residents are said to be running away from quarantine centres around the country without completing the prescribed mandatory time in isolation, to allow authorities to manage the disease in the event that it manifests itself among the returnees. The director for Epidemiology and Disease Control in the ministry of Health and Child Care, Portia Manangazira, told the Daily News yesterday that authorities were worried about the rising cases of coronavirus in the country. She also admitted that there was overcrowding at some of the quarantine centres, but said authorities were working flat out to decongest such centres by establishing more facilities countrywide. Available information shows that four of the eight new corona cases in the country are of returnees — three from the United Kingdom and one from Zambia. This comes as cases of Covid-19 have risen sharply in the last few days, climbing to 46 after almost two weeks without any new ones reported. The rising infections also come as the government has been criticised for failing to embark on an expanded programme of testing of people for the virus to ascertain the prevalence of the lethal disease among local communities. So far, Zimbabwe has recorded four deaths from the 46 people who have tested positive for Covid-19.
President Emmerson Mnangagwa extended the corona national lockdown indefinitely over the weekend, citing the need to maintain low infections in the country. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Meanwhile, the secretary general of the Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA), Aaron Musara, warned yesterday that truck drivers could be among the major sources of the spread of the pandemic in the country. Ordinary Zimbabweans who spoke to the Daily News yesterday also expressed fears that there could be more returnees who made their way back into the country using illegal entry points and without being tested. Talent Chanakira also said most returning Zimbabweans were finding it difficult to be accepted without being stigmatised when they left quarantine centres. “Whether they are coming from a quarantine centre or not, people will be suspicious, especially with the news that some are fleeing the centres. “The solution lies in government carrying out mass tests,” Chanakira told the Daily News.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw