Blessing Masakadza LIFESTYLE WRITER masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw SOUTH Africa-based reggae-dancehall singer Buffalo Soulja has joined several other arts practitioners who have expressed displeasure in that Zimbabwean musicians missed out on yesterday’s Africa Day concert hosted by Idris Elba on MTV Base Africa. The concert featured various African singers among them Diamond Platnumz, AKA, Burna Boy, Fally Ipupa, Yemi Alade, Sauti Sol and Bebe Cool. The singer registered his displeasure with a social media post saying in the spirit of unity, all countries ought to have been represented. His sentiments were supported by various people who commented on his post. However, others felt it’s a matter of time before Zimbabwean singers get to such platforms as they have the potential. Arts enthusiast Benjamin Nyandoro said local musicians should not lose hope and continue working hard. “This is a bigger platform and I’m optimistic one day we will be there. This is all about unity and it comes yearly and one day we will have an opportunity to showcase.” Another arts promoter Samuel Saungweme said local entertainers are working hard and one day they will be considered. “This is a huge platform and I believe we will get an opportunity to be there. We have hard working entertainers and they will break into bigger markets. What we need right now is unity in the industry for our artists to collaborate and push each other as is done in markets such as Nigeria, DRC and South Africa.” Jah Prayzah as suggested by Buffalo Soulja has worked with the likes of Diamond Platnumz, Yemi Alade, Sauti Sol who are all on the line up for the concert. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Winky D has in the past participated on regional platforms such as the Coke Studio, combining with other African entertainers. Meanwhile local musicians yesterday joined the rest of Africa in celebrating Africa Day by displaying some of their productions. Dendera musician Suluman Chimbetu took to social media to remember his late father Simon with the popular song One Way.  “Today we celebrate you our motherland Africa. The progress we have seen in development and let’s keep on promoting the spirit of togetherness as we fight to combat a mutual enemy Covid-19. There is ‘One way for Africa’ which is unity,” Sulu said. This was also the case with Tryson Chimbetu who celebrated the day with the success of this particular song which calls for African Unity. Contemporary musician Jah Prayzah celebrated the day by plucking a song off his latest album Hokoyo, which calls on people to be proud of their roots, a message which fits directly into the Africa Day celebrations. Comediennes Madam Boss and Mai Titi also joined in the celebrations with posts on their social media pages. “We are Africans not because we are born in Africa but because Africa is born us,” Madam Boss wrote. Others such as Buffalo Souljah celebrated the day, dedicating the song One Love on which he worked with DJ Waxxy and Blacklez.