BLACK  EDWARD A SEA of commuters stretched on forever when I got to the bus stop. Curses and bitter complaints flooded the place as restless commuters waited in vain for the much-sought after Zupco buses. In a bid to make the waiting bearable, I struck up a conversation with an elderly man.
To break the ice I said: “This coronavirus pandemic is causing all sorts of problems for us.” He disagreed: “Not exactly. The people are the problem, not corona. Minutes slipped away and became hours while we talked without a bus in sight.
It was clear that even if a Zupco bus did come we would not get in — we weren’t old enough to get special treatment and we weren’t young enough to “elbow” our way into the bus. Multitudes of people were stranded. My fellow commuter suggested we walked, hoping to get transport along the way. “You see, the phrase ‘the new normal’ has been thrown around in connection with coronavirus to justify the unacceptable. “In fact it should be ‘novel abnormalcy for Zim citizens’ because the new normal should not make people suffer. If it makes people suffer it’s abnormal, so it’s a new abnormal unfolding,” he said as we walked along Willowvale Road and I nodded in agreement. I then looked back at the bus stop and saw that some commuters, desperate to get to work on time, were now dangerously flagging down private vehicles in the middle of the road. I turned to my fellow commuter who continued: “Talking about poor policies, do you know that people are starving as we speak? The irony of it all is that small-to-medium businesses, which were supporting these people who are now starving, were intentionally destroyed. For example in Chitubu, where I live, an informal businessman lost property worth thousands of United States dollars. The buildings he had been operating from for many years were demolished and his equipment destroyed without warning by officials who claimed this was meant to curb the spread of corona. His 15 employees are now jobless.” “And did you see pictures of two battered and bruised ladies that went viral on social media recently?” he asked and I shook my head: “It is said the ladies were arrested and handcuffed while in a queue to buy foodstuffs for their families at a supermarket in Bulawayo,” he adjusted his face mask, “According to media reports, the ladies had to seek medical treatment after being brutally assaulted for hours with batons allegedly by police officers who accused them of breaking lockdown regulations. No, there’s nothing normal about brutality,” he added. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Listening to him was a lesson in general knowledge. “The other day on my way to work I came across a soldier who was standing near traffic lights and he beckoned to me. I approached him and he asked me where I was going. I told him I had a letter to confirm that I was an employee performing essential services during lockdown. When I produced the letter, he rolled it into a ball and put it into his pocket. He ordered me to remove my shoes and to sit on the edge of the road,” he was silent for a moment and I stared at him in disbelief, “the soldier then said he did not go to school and could not read so we should wait for his colleagues who could read, but he didn’t know what time they were coming…” While he was talking about the soldier, I heard the sound of a heavy vehicle and from a distance I could see it was an army truck. I cut his speech short by shouting: “Soldiers!” With the speed of lightening, he disappeared into tall grass on the side of the road. I just stood rigid with my mouth open as the truck passed by. “You can come out now, they are gone,” I said peering into the tall grass, but there was no sign of my fellow commuter. He was gone. I wished I had taken his details. I had to complete the journey alone. But I was not really alone, his words “people are the problem, not corona… new abnormal unfolding…” kept ringing in my ears.