OVER the years, the growth of local cricket in the black community has always been centred on the suburb of Highfield in terms of players, coaches and administrators. However, just a few kilometres away; Glen View has also been a hub where the gentlemen’s game has been equally embraced. Some of the leading players to come out of the area to have gone on to represent Zimbabwe at international level include Cephas Zhuwao, Trevor Garwe and Luke Jongwe. Another Glen View native — Leonard Nhamburo — has also been a paying his dues in the trenches to uplift the game in the area and beyond. He started off as a club cricketer but he would soon realise his limitations and his talent and hard work alone would see him rise to First Class status and eventually the national team. Due to his intimate knowledge of the game, Nhamburo chose to go the coaching route where he could use his knowledge to groom players. “Obviously when you start to play the game, your dream is to play for your country and play top level cricket but that was not my portion,” Nhamburo told the Daily News on Sunday. “I then took up coaching and my goal was to produce players that are good enough to play national team cricket and fill in the gaps that I failed to cover and also develop the game. “And also seeing other coaches rising through the coaching ranks; I just told myself that not playing for the national team or First Class does not mean that I am not good and it doesn’t mean that I can’t coach at the highest level. It however, did not come easy; it needed a lot of hard work, dedication and commitment.” His journey into coaching started off on a voluntary basis when he opted to provide his expertise free of charge to Glen View 8 Primary School in 1998. Nhamburo then joined Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) in 2000 and two years later, he was appointed the Glen View 3 Primary School development coach where he worked together with Bertha Kaitano, who was the teacher in charge at the school. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); At that school, Nhamburo was able to help nurture the likes of Lady Chevrons’ trio of Modester Mupachikwa, Esther Mbofana, Audrey Mazvishaya while Monalisa Chimutashu is now representing Canada.
Garwe also came through his hands and he had to convert him from being a wicketkeeper into a speedster. U19 spinner Privilege Chesa, who was ranked fourth for the most five wickets at the 2020 ICC Under 19 World Cup in South Africa, is also a product of Glen View 3 Primary School.
Joylord Gumbie, Tafadzwa Muzarawetu and Luke Masasire developed their game under Nhamburo at the school. Despite all these achievements, Nhamburo remained underrated in the ZC coaching hierarchy only landing assistant roles with the Lady Chevrons. Nhamburo thought his big break had arrived when he was in 2017 appointed the team’s coach on an interim basis.
However, he was snubbed and was left out of a job when ZC did not offer him a permanent contract despite all the strides the team had taken under his watch. In the end, he decided to go to Namibia where he was named the women’s national team coaching consultant.
He did not disappoint as he led the Namibians to the final of the 2019 ICC Women’s Qualifier Africa held here in Zimbabwe. Nhamburo’s team came into the tournament ranked outsiders but overcame favourites Uganda and Kenya to reach the final where they eventually lost to the hosts by 50 runs. As fate would have it for Nhamburo, his native Zimbabwe was suspended by the ICC due to government interference in the running of the local game. Namibia replaced Zimbabwe and went on to participate in the ICC Global Qualifiers in Scotland as Africa’s representatives. Unfortunately, Namibia did not renew Nhamburo’s contract despite having surpassed the targets that they had stipulated. “I have lots of memories of my time with the Namibian Eagles. I was exposed to the highest level of the game being in charge of the team,” he said. “I believed in my personal capabilities as a coach and winning against the best teams in Africa (Uganda and Kenya) for the first time really was something quite extraordinary, the girls had passion and they had the fighting spirit. “Playing the Global World Cup Qualifier in Scotland and having Namibia travel to play outside the African continent for the first time was just more than a dream come true and as a coach I have never missed the Africa and World Global games since 2014 though in other years I was an assistant coach.” Meeting hosts Zimbabwe in the final of the ICC Africa Women Qualifier was a tough period for Nhamburo but he just had to be professional and do his job. On his side he had good players in the mold of captain and all-rounder Yasmeen Khan, off-spinner Victoria Hamunyela, batter Adri van DeMerwe, seamer Sylvia Shihepo and wicketkeeper Kaylenn Green.
“That was a game-and-a-half and I will always remember that final. Zimbabwe had been with their players for more than 15 years,” he said. Some of them I even saw them growing up in the system so obviously there was a sentimental attachment but my bread was being buttered the other side so we even wanted to beat Zimbabwe at all cost. “I guess one year with Namibia was not enough maybe two years or more I would have been satisfied to see them becoming one of the strongest teams in southern Africa.”
So what next for Nhamburo? He has set his eyes on conquering Africa in the women’s game and already two East African countries have been in contact with his agent Oracle Sport. Oracle Sport representative Kudakwashe Goredema confirmed to the Daily News on Sunday the enquiry from the two African countries. “There has been some inquiries on Nhamburo’s availability from two East African countries after they learnt that he is available following his one-year stint in Namibia,’ he said. “Unfortunately the negotiations have been hampered by the coronavirus pandemic as you are aware sport has also been impacted heavily.” Goredema has not ruled out the possibility of Nhamburo coaching locally if an opportunity arises.
“Look here, Nhamburo is a Zimbabwean and it is always an honour to coach your country but I can’t be talking about a coaching post that is not vacant at the moment that will be disrespectful to a fellow coach,” he said. “But what I can say is that Nhamburo’s record with youngsters and the girl child speaks for itself so if a post to work with juniors arises within ZC I can’t rule out my client’s prospects of joining the organisation.” 