Tarisai Machakaire
STAFF WRITER
machakairet@dailynews.co.zwSUSPENDED NetOne chief executive Lazarus Muchenje, pictured, was yesterday freed on $3 000 bail after initially appearing in court on Saturday over a slew of corruption charges in which the parastatal allegedly lost over US$1 million.  Muchenje appeared before Harare magistrate Lazini Ncube jointly charged with interconnection and roaming manager Tawanda Sibanda, 49, acting chief finance officer Tinashe Severa, 43, chief technology officer Darlington Gutu, 53, chief operating officer Spencer Manguwa, 43, acting head of legal affairs Tanyaradzwa Chingombe, 28, and a former legal trainee Shamaine Kadenhe, 29.  The group is facing charges of criminal abuse of office or alternatively contravening Section 4 of the Postal and Telecommunications (International Telecommunications Rates).  Muchenje also appeared on another record with former NetOne board member Paradzayi Chakona on criminal abuse of office or alternatively fraud charges involving fraudulent undervaluing rentals for a property.
The rest of the accused persons were granted $3 000 bail except for Kadenhe who got $700 bail after Ncube considered that she was an intern when the offence was committed.  The group was represented by Ashiel Mugiya, Innocent Chingarande, Webster Jiti, Nikita Madya, and Mehluli Tshuma with prosecutors Michael Reza and Charles Muchemwa appearing for the State.
They were ordered to continue residing at their present addresses, not interfere with witnesses, surrender passports and report once a week at Harare Central Police Station until the matter is finalised.  The case was remanded to June 2 after Mugiya gave notice of his intention to file an application challenging placement on remand of their clients on that date on the basis that the State had failed to disclose any offence in its allegations.  “The release of an accused person is now a constitutional right unless there are compelling reasons warranting denial of bail. What has happened is that the State used a dragnet to catch everyone on the way because it is not clear how each accused person participated in the offence,” Ncube ruled. “When the accused persons were arrested, Muchenje was on suspension, Kadenhe was no longer with the organisation after completing her internship and Chakona was no longer a board member such that is not possible that they interfered.  “Considering what has begotten the global community, which is the coronavirus, it is not possible for the accused persons to abscond and moreover the accused persons were aware of the charges, but did not abscond.”
Muchenje and Chakona are accused of corruptly entering a lease agreement for a NetOne house without board approval.  Chakona represented NetOne as the lessor and the property’s rental range was supposed to be US$2 500 to US$3 500 per month at interbank rates, but Muchenje was allegedly made to pay $1 000 per month, prejudicing the mobile operator.