Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zwCHURCHES want the government to probe last week’s alleged abduction and torture of three MDC youth leaders, as well as last month’s brutal assault of two Bulawayo sisters by police, the Daily News reports.  This comes as Home Affairs minister Kazembe Kazembe has also directed the police boss, Godwin Matanga, to institute a full-scale investigation into the alleged abduction and torture of the three women at the centre of last week’s furore.  It also comes as Justice minister Ziyambi Ziyambi has said police should arrest the youth leaders, Harare West MP Joanna Mamombe, Cecilia Chimbiri and Netsai Marova — for breaking lockdown rules after they staged a demonstration in Harare.  The Zimbabwe Heads of Christian Denominations (ZHOCD) said yesterday that there was need for an independent inquiry to investigate both the allegations of torture against the MDC youth leaders, and the assault of the two Bulawayo sisters. “It should be stated that the reports suggesting … Mamombe … Chimbiri and … Marova, were taken from police custody … tortured, sexually assaulted and inhumanly treated by yet to be known agents, point to something that is against the heart of the Constitution of Zimbabwe … various international conventions to which Zimbabwe is a signatory and, above all, to our cultural norms and our Christian fundamental beliefs regarding the sanctity and dignity of life.  “In light of the above, the Zimbabwe Heads of Christian Denominations calls for the institution of an urgent independent investigation into the circumstances around the brutal assault of Ntombizodwa and Nokuthula Mpofu on 16 April 2020 in Cowdray Park, as well as the abduction and torture of … Mamombe … Chimbiri and … Marova.  “The findings should be made public, with appropriate and swift disciplinary action to be instituted against the perpetrators,” the clerics said.  Meanwhile, the Zimbabwe Gender Commission (ZGC) says it is conducting an investigation into the alleged abduction and torture of the three MDC members.  The trio alleges that they were abducted and tortured by suspected State agents, before being dumped near Bindura, in the aftermath of their demo in Warren Park last week.  On Friday, the three women told the media how they had ended up in the hands of suspected State security operatives, who allegedly went on to assault them with guns and sticks during a “horrendous interrogation”.
On the other hand, on April 16, the Mpofu siblings were savagely beaten by police for allegedly violating lockdown rules.