Nokuthaba Nkomo
STAFF WRITER
nkomon@dailynews.co.zw  ©️ CIVIL servants have made a new call for the government to pay their salaries in United States dollars (USD) following a fresh wave of price hikes that hit the country at the weekend.  This comes as a survey by the Daily News showed that there have been further steep adjustments to the prices of basic goods — which were already beyond the reach of many before the weekend price increases.  Zimbabwe Teachers’ Association (Zimta) secretary-general Tapson Sibanda said paying teachers and other civil servants in USD was now the solution as the Zimbabwe dollar has become an insult.   “The government should move out of denial mode and be realistic in the manner it tackles the current economic challenges. It should stop addressing the symptoms instead of the root causes of this economic crisis,” Sibanda said.  Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (Artuz) president Obert Masaraure told the Daily News that the government should address their plight before schools resume or risk a strike.  “Government should pay us the US$520 salaries we used to earn in 2018. Goods and services are being paid for in foreign currency yet our salaries are being paid in  local currency. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “Teachers will not be returning back to work until salaries are reviewed. We once again reiterate that Mthuli Ncube (the Finance minister) has failed us and must be fired with immediate effect,” Masaraure said.  The government recently announced that schools would resume classes in phases beginning mid-June.
Progressive Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) secretary-general Raymond Majongwe said teachers would not go back to work if the government does not review their salaries immediately.   “It’s time for government to be serious. Paying teachers $2 900 when four people need more than $9 000 to survive is an insult,” said Majongwe.  The PTUZ secretary-general said the recent introduction of $10 and $20 notes could be the cause of the new wave of price increases.  “Everything is now being rounded off around these figures. We are worried that if this is not addressed we are going to plunge into more economic misery.  “The most important point that the government is supposed to understand is that they cannot address the country’s economic challenges by pretending they are doing something when they are not doing anything,” Majongwe said.  At the same time, the Zimbabwe Professional Nurses Union (ZPNU) secretary-general Douglas Chikobvu said they were tired of continuously subsidising their employer.  He said it was now difficult for nurses and other health workers to focus on their duties with dedication as they will be thinking of ways to provide for their families.  “We are struggling to make ends meet and today we don’t have any safety nets to cushion us further. Therefore, we call upon the government to be very practical by pegging our salaries at interbank rates,” he said.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 