©️ALL Members of Parliament — including those from the opposition — will now be expected to recognise President Emmerson Mnangagwa following the adoption of new rules by the august House, the Daily News reports.  Parliament is now using new Standing Rules and Orders after MPs on Tuesday approved a motion by Parliamentary Affairs minister Ziyambi Ziyambi for the adoption of the 2020 edition of the procedures. The new rules that will, among other things, force MPs to recognise Mnangagwa as the legitimately elected head of the executive, were approved after Zanu PF MPs adopted them without debate in the absence of boycotting MDC legislators.   When National Assembly Speaker Jacob Mudenda put it before the House to whether there was need to debate the motion on Tuesday, it was met with a chorus of “no debate”. In the end, the standing rules, which were last week circulated to all legislators electronically, were dully approved. According to the new rules, Standing Order 86 has been titled “Respect of the president”. “The Committee agreed that new Standing Order Number 86 be inserted to read as follows; members shall observe utmost dignity and decorum during the president’s address” and that “a Member shall not disrupt or interrupt the president’s address through disorderly conduct,” part of the rules read. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Furthermore, standing order 108 speaks to the definition of “Disorderly Conduct” in Parliament which was not clear in the old rules. The new one which provides that a member is deemed to have committed an act of disorderly conduct if he or she “defies a ruling or direction of the Speaker or chairperson of Committee, attempts to or causes disorder of whatever nature during the attendance of the president or a visiting dignitary in terms of Standing Order 85; or during an address by the president in terms of Standing Order 86”.  This comes after the Chamisa-led MDC-Alliance MPs have since the 2018 disputed elections, been waving the legitimacy card against Mnangagwa, arguing that he rigged himself to power notwithstanding the Constitutional Court ruling upholding his victory. Some of the actions the party has taken to show their disdain for Mnangagwa include walking out on him at public functions, including Parliament. In August last year, the opposition backbenchers refused to stand up in the president’s honour when he entered the National Assembly to present his state of the nation address (Sona) before walking out as soon as he began his address. An MP is also deemed to have acted in contempt of Parliament if he or she declines to retract words ruled unparliamentary by the Speaker, or declines to offer an apology, when ordered to do so. It will also be rendered contemptuous if one demonstrates or makes disruptive utterances against the suspension of a Member, uses violence against a Member or other person in the House or Committee, attempts to or disrupts the Speaker’s Procession when entering or leaving the Chamber; attempts to or removes the mace from its place in the Chamber; or acts in any other way to the serious detriment of the dignity or disorderly procedure of the House.   If a member is named under Standing Order 111 for disorderly conduct, the suspension period shall be four sitting days on the first occasion in the same session, excluding the day of suspension, on the second occasion in the same or subsequent Session, another eight and 16 days on the third or a subsequent occasion in the same Session. “A Member who is suspended from the House shall, during the period of suspension not enter the precincts of Parliament or participate in the activity of Parliament or a Committee of Parliament,” the rule reads.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms.Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw . 