SHADOWY businesspeople are abusing mobile money platforms to bleed the economy and consequently drive inflation on the black market even as most parts of the country remain largely on lockdown, Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) Governor John Mangudya said.  Appearing before the parliamentary portfolio committee for Budget and Finance, which is chaired by Felix Mhonda, Mangudya yesterday admitted it would be difficult to tame the black market because of the rent-seeking and speculative behaviour of Zimbabweans.   “They are making money from selling money, they wake up every morning and ask where (sic) the rate will be and if it is at 1:40 they will go to 1:45 in order to make a profit and the trend continues, that way it will become a Ponzi scheme.  “It is not about us hating the mobile platforms, but what happens there is more like Sodom and Gomorrah. You ask yourself what is happening and there is no clear answer. We are very concerned.  It’s more like shadow banking and when that happens, it becomes a serious threat to the economy,” said Mangudya.  As of yesterday, the country’s dollar was trading at 1:60 to the United States dollar after the introduction of new $10 notes on Tuesday, with Mangudya admitting before the committee that it would be an exercise in futility if the apex bank adjusts the official rate that is currently pegged at 1:25 to match the runaway parallel market rate.  “It is not about money supply that has caused inflation, we are defying logic, we are going against the grain.
“Whenever we put measures in place to make our economy grow, it seems there is a asymmetric economic warfare, it is more like a guerrilla warfare, this is a disappointing factor and we need to work as team Zimbabwe to end this.  “The rate changes in the minds of people, there is no country that does not have a parallel rate, but the parallel rate in Zimbabwe changes frequently, why can’t it be stable. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Amid a proliferation of money laundering and illicit foreign currency dealings on the black market, the RBZ early this month directed banks to freeze over 100 accounts linked to mobile money transfer platforms that were suspected to be at the heart of the illegal practices.  However, Mangudya said the RBZ has not launched a witch-hunt against mobile banking platforms, but is concerned with the amount of money in circulation on those platforms which could cause shockwaves within the economy if it is not accounted for.