Blessing Masakadza LIFESTYLE WRITER masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw DIGITAL platforms allow for wider participation of artists and provide a platform for networking, Arts and Culture minister Kirsty Coventry, pictured, has said. Marking the official launch of Culture Week which commenced yesterday, Coventry said this year’s activity provides an opportunity for wider participation of communities through online interaction and exchange of ideas on arts and culture in addition to creating platforms for artists to interact and network. The minister noted how Covid-19 has impacted on the country’s culture, creating the new normal. She urged the nation not to let the virus break the people and force them into shunning their culture. Several artists will throughout the week showcase their craft online as the country celebrates Culture Week at a time there is a national lockdown. Culture Week is commemorated annually and celebrates cultural diversity in the country. The week-long fete is running under the theme “Zimbabwe @ 40 Celebrating our Cultural Diversity and Heritage” and this year’s event would have been marked by a national launch in the Midlands Province by President Emmerson Mnangagwa. This will, however, not happen as the country abides by the stipulated measures in fighting the virus. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Culture Week features various performances, exhibitions and demonstrations of Zimbabwe’s rich cultural offerings and they will be showcased online. Tomorrow the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe will lead an online discussion titled The impact of Covid-19 on traditional Zimbabwean cultural practices while the National Gallery of Zimbabwe will showcase an online visual exhibition dubbed “Freedom through the eyes of General Tongo”. On Saturday evening there will be a musical concert featuring some of the country’s top singers to mark the end of the Culture Week. Over the years, the Culture Week has been celebrated by various arts gatherings and activities in different provinces. This year it will be done online with various WhatsApp groups having been created. 