Sindiso Mhlophe SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw ©️ THE governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ), John Mangudya, has revealed that the country’s new higher denominated notes will start circulating from next week, the Daily News reports.   Mangudya said yesterday that the new $10 notes would start circulating next Tuesday, with the $20 notes being introduced in the first week of June.   “The bank also advises that it has revised withdrawal limits upwards from $300 per week to $1 000 per week with effect from 19 May, 2020.  “Banks will not tolerate any abuse of currency and will decisively deal with any such abuse in terms of the law,” Mangudya said.  The introduction of the higher denominations is part of the $600 million that the RBZ is injecting into the market, as it moves to widen the circulation of physical money in the economy. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  The front of the $10 bank note will have dominant features such as the RBZ logo (three balancing rocks), with the visually impaired recognition feature on its left side.  It also features a latent image showing the denomination, optical variable ink with a colour shift from magenta to green, a security thread with the inscription “RBZ”, a watermark with a highlighted inscription “RBZ 10”, and a see-through of the Zimbabwe Bird looking to the left in perfect register.  The back of the $10 note has an impression of the RBZ headquarters in Harare and four buffaloes.
The $20 bank note has on its front the RBZ logo, with the visually impaired recognition feature to the left, a latent image showing the denomination, optical variable ink with a colour shift from green to azure, a security thread with the inscription “RBZ”, a watermark with a highlighted inscription “RBZ 20”, and a see-through of the Zimbabwe Bird looking to the left in perfect register.  Its back has an elephant and the majestic Victoria Falls.  The new notes come at a time that the country is in the grip of a huge economic crisis which has been exacerbated by the global coronavirus pandemic.  They also come as long suffering Zimbabweans have had to endure ever-increasing prices of basic consumer goods and services, which retailers and industry  have blamed on the country’s worsening economic rot.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 