Maxwell Sibanda ASSISTANT EDITOR THE government of Zimbabwe has no culture and tradition of supporting its creative sector because it is African traction based; a top playwright, Cont Mhlanga has said. His sentiments add to several other arts practitioners’ voices that have also expressed deep disappointment at the State’s neglect of the arts sector which has been exposed by the coronavirus (Covid-19) national lockdown which has grounded all artists’ activities. Mhlanga believes the bulk of government officials running affairs were taught by white colonisers that anything of African tradition is not important and must not be given priority on the policy table. Mhlanga challenged artists to step forward and approach government.
“While the arts sector will never be the same again after the lockdown, it will never die because it is driven by creativity. The arts sector will pull through, government or no government, donor or no donors. Mhlanga added that the onus is on the artists themselves during this lockdown period to find themselves and find each other and reorganise their sector to come out stronger and better. Music star Leonard Zhakata said it is very sad and unfortunate that Zimbabwe doesn’t have a clear arts policy 40 years into independence. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “How can everyone be silent about this clear demise of the arts industry; can you imagine how artists are surviving right now? But we have Zimbabwe Music Rights Association (Zimura) which collects royalties on behalf of musicians and it is a well-organised arts body; why not use Zimura even to lend money to musicians that can be recovered through royalties?” The Mugove hit-maker warned those in authority. “Don’t forget that a hungry man is an angry man, they should not punish kids if they start singing protest songs.
“Why can’t they consider us as the most affected industry? We need modern day thinking and not old theories that regard musicians as vagrants. The entire globe nations are involving artists and saving their arts industries from collapse. We demand to be recognised as ambassadors of our cultural identity, not this.” Writer Virginia Phiri said this is a sad story for Zimbabwean artists.
“They had worked so hard to get to a point where they were earning decent money to support themselves and their families. They even quit their jobs because earnings were much better as artists. “It is clear that poverty is looming on artists if they do not get a bailout from the government. The irony is government is the biggest consumer of arts in every department. If the artists are taken care of now, there is hope that the creative industry is the one which will be in the forefront to kick start the economy. “There is evidence that there are countries whose higher GDP comes from the arts sector. Right now most artists are being assisted by family and friends. By the way artists have families like everyone else. Apart from rent and food, there is school fees and medical insurance.” Guitarist Josh Meck said the Covid-19 pandemic caught everyone unaware and that includes artists.
“Other governments have taken it upon themselves to help their artists. From my survey, artists have been negatively affected by this pandemic. They are suffering. I was hoping the government would do something for the arts sector to help those struggling artists. There is still hope for the artists. I am sure it’s not too late for the government to intervene.” Music teacher and choreographer Clayton Ndlovu doesn’t blame the government as it has been consistent with its lack of meaningful contribution and recognition of the arts since independence. “Tell me, which arts centre or theatre that has been built by government since independence? Even the National Arts Council headquarters is being housed in a building that is not even conducive for arts development. “We only have privately-owned arts centres that thrive from donor support and some of them are really struggling to create programmes and projects that help our community. So there is absolutely nothing new with government’s lack of meaningful support towards the creative industry,” said Ndlovu. He said artists have made government to think they don’t deserve better. “So the challenge now is for artists to shift their way of doing things. We need to be organised. We need to go back to the drawing board and start working together. The sector is composed of various art forms; film and television, musicians, dancers, theatre, visual artists, writers, fashion designers, technicians in productions, producers and promoters. All the sectors need to function with proper administrative structures. “We need these unions, organisations, trusts or associations to be fully registered and recognised by National Arts Council of Zimbabwe through appropriate funding from government. It is our right as artists to be recognised as it is enshrined in our Constitution.” Musicians union executive Edith WeUtonga said a fund was announced by government although it was specifically allocated for economic recovery. “Now considering that the inflation rate is going up daily, the arts sector will need more than $20 million. I hope that when all this has passed, there will be some real money to give to the sector. As we speak musicians are like any other Zimbabwean in need of food and a place to stay but there has been no help or plan to disburse towards individual artists.” Ndlovu believes the $20 million is not enough in the first place. “There is this belief that the creative industry can fund itself. No! Successful projects have always had massive financial assistance from mostly donors, the likes of Amakhosi Arts Centre, Theatre in The Park, Studio 263, Film Neria just to mention a few. “So post-Covid-19, things have to change. We need to organise ourselves. We should resist individualism and unite to build this industry with proper structures and way of organising things. “I am wondering how the $20 million given by government to assist artists during lockdown was or will be distributed nation-wide. Artists are not in Harare only! So what criteria would or was used to give assistance to artists. Which sector? How much per artist? “How do you avoid ghost artists? There are captains of the industry who have the expertise and the experience and can give guidance towards the next step. To continue with the status will not help with the Arts industry. Artists need to change their way if doing things. Right now, with the way things are.” Singer Victor Kunonga said the arts sector is in trouble. “If I am correct, there were discussions on recommendation with the minister of Arts. Unfortunately, while all this is taking place, the artists and the industry is struggling and God knows what will become of most of us. I am not sure what to recommend right now except to highlight that artists who generally struggle during the normal times are worse of in these tough times.”