©️ DESPITE the continued rise in water levels in the Kariba Dam, the Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) will not allow Zambia and Zimbabwe to use more water for electricity generation. This comes as current levels have surpassed 2019 levels by more than three percent.
“The Kariba is designed to operate between levels 475,50m and 488,50m with 0,70m freeboard for hydropower generation. “The Lake level has continued rising steadily. It closed the period under review at 480,66m or 36,76 percent usable storage on May 25, 2020. Last year on the same date, the Lake level was at 479,95m or 31,45 percent usable storage,” the authority said. The Authority also said the high-water level recorded at the Victoria Falls in Livingstone have not yet reached the Kariba Dam. ZRA chief executive Munyaradzi Munodawafa said it would take approximately nine weeks for the water at Victoria Falls to reach the dam. “Even when the water levels increase in Lake Kariba, the Authority will not allow the two power utility firms to use more than the allocated cubic litres of water for this year. The idea is to reserve water for next year’s use in an event that the dam does not receive enough water due to effects of climate change,” he said. He noted that even when the water reaches the Kariba Dam, it will not be sufficient to generate the required electricity. According to a schedule released by the ZRA recently, the rising water levels were recorded over a two-week period and anticipated a steady increase in supply for electricity generation. The authority has also been studying other catchments in Zambia which provide water to the dam for electricity generation in both countries. ZRA director of water resources and environmental management, Christopher Chisense said currently Kariba was generating more than 2 000 megawatts (MW) which was being shared equally between Zimbabwe and Zambia. Chisense said there were also some projects that the authority was looking into that would produce more power for the two countries. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Undeveloped projects have a combined electricity production of plus or minus 5 000 MW of electricity and combined with what is already being generated we are looking at more than 7 000MW being produced along the section of the shared Zambezi River,” he said.Mabvuku residents queue for water at a borehole in the high density suburb. Mabvuku and the nearby Tafara suburbs have not received council tap water for a very long time now.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw