Tinashe Sibanda Lifestyle Writer sibandat@dailynews.co.zw  BULAWAYO-BASED Afro tribal artist Stuart Chikuni aka Stewie Le Savage has released a new song titled The Revelations which is a unique fusion of Spoken Word and Amapiano genres. Produced by Shuza Drums and Tha Dawg, the track addresses preparedness of people for judgment day; the day they’ll die. In an interview with the Daily News Chikuni said: “After reading the book of Revelations and looking at how things are turning out in the world, I just figured it was best for me to write this song as a reminder that people should stay prepared.” Stewie Le Savage said the current Covid-19 pandemic has affected him both negatively and positively. “It affected me negatively by hindering me from being able to record more music and be able to perform but then it also gave me a chance to introspect, write and discover my purpose in life.” Born in April 1996, he started singing in primary school and then in high school. He later joined a drama club at Amhlophe High School where he released his first musical project in October 2018 where he was featured on the Musical Therapy by Anonymous Music. In the same month, he released Voice of the Oppressed featuring producer Shuza Drums; this was a spoken word contemporary house song reflecting on black people’s mind-sets after years of oppression. “In November 2018 I then released The breakup song; a spoken word and deep house song which looks at the picture of a heartbroken man breaking up with a woman whom he has been involved with for quite a long time. “Last year on Africa Day I released Umthombo Wothando featuring producer Base Wasilewski which I can safely say is my biggest project so far. It has been remixed by three South African producers,” he said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Umthombo Wothando is a motivation song to young people, that no matter what they go through in life they should always love and care for other people. In December 2019 he then released Freedom Train featuring Novuyo Seagirl and Base Wasilewski; another spoken word house track basically looking at most Zimbabwean youth’s mind-sets while looking at the country’s economic situation. “I have not released any album yet but this year I’m working on one though I’ve been disturbed by this coronavirus pandemic. I believe this lockdown is for the best because it gave me time to introspect and find myself and it also gave me time to write new content.” Stewie Le Savage has four single hit tracks out now and this latest offering is his fifth single.