©️ ZIMBABWE’S confirmed coronavirus (Covid-19) cases have shot up to 56 as five new people tested positive on Friday.  This comes as health experts have expressed doubt over the government’s ability to manage the Covid-19 outbreak in the country due to test kit shortages and the poor state of quarantine centres.  According to the latest Health and Child Care ministry Covid-19 update, the country now has 34 active cases, 18 recoveries and four deaths.   The ministry added that only 295 Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDT) and 110 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests were done last Friday countrywide.  The tests fall far short of the government’s target of 2 000 tests per day. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  The failure to meet the target has been blamed on a serious shortage of test kits and reagents.
Health and Child Care minister Obadiah Moyo has, however, appealed for calm, saying the government was working closely with its partners to improve the supply of the critical consumables.  “We do not live in isolation. Globally, there is an increased demand for reagents (required for testing) and other consumables that are needed in the fight against Covid-19.  “This has caused a scramble for materials among nations and inevitably we are also affected,” Moyo said, adding:
“However, we are working around the clock with our partners to ensure that we test as many people as possible and that we improve our quarantine facilities.  “We are confident that we will be able to meet the challenges and that our health facilities and personnel are adequately equipped.”  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 