DUE to a plethora of challenges ranging from high unemployment rate, cash and foreign currency shortages, climate change shocks, corruption and soaring prices of basic goods and services, Zimbabwe, once the bread basket of Africa, is now rated as one of the world’s top global food crises. According to a recent report by United Nations (UN) agencies, the new Global Food Crisis Report Forecast (GFCRF), Zimbabwe remains in the grip of severe food insecurity, with millions of people already requiring humanitarian assistance due to prolonged drought, climate-related shocks and a sinking economy. The report further said the situation was set to worsen due to the effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. The World Food Programme (WFP) is one of the many organisations working to offer food assistance to millions of vulnerable Zimbabweans. The Daily News on Sunday Senior Reporter Sindiso Mhlophe sat down with WFP country director Eddie Rowe to discuss the food crisis and the impact of Covid-19, among other issues. Below are the excerpts of the interview. Q: Can you briefly describe your work as the WFP in Zimbabwe? A: The WFP is one of the United Nations’ agencies and it is present in Zimbabwe to support the government to address the root causes of vulnerability through activities that strengthen safety nets and build resilience, while also providing life-saving humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable people. We provide assistance to vulnerable groups, including women, children and refugees in both urban and rural areas across the country. The WFP also seeks to complement the government’s efforts aimed at achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) two on ending hunger, and SDG 17 on global partnerships. As such, the WFP has forged partnerships with the government, other UN agencies, civil society organisations, academia, donors, private sector and communities to achieve these goals. As we carry out our work, we are guided by our five-year Country Strategic Plan 2017-2021, which is about eradicating hunger and ensuring better nutrition through humanitarian aid and most importantly resilience programmes. Resilience is one of the important strategies as it empowers communities with the capacity to absorb future climate induced shocks and we are aiming to increase our resilience-building activities through supporting smallholder farmers, and programmes aiming to rehabilitate and create community assets, such as water harvesting systems. Q: How would you describe the food situation in Zimbabwe; that is in terms of how many people are vulnerable and in need of food assistance in both rural and urban areas? googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); A: Zimbabwe has been facing severe climate change-induced droughts; flash floods as well as economic recession for many years. These challenges have been worsened by the impact of the coronavirus (Covid-19) which has resulted in the loss of livelihoods for many. As the WFP, we normally do bi-annual assessments of the food situation and the assessment which we carried out late last year indicated that 7,7 million people in Zimbabwe were food insecure. 5,5 million were people living in rural areas while 2,2 million were in urban areas. The assessment also indicated that 3,3 million out of the 7,7 million were in the crisis or emergency stage, which means that they are in urgent need of food assistance otherwise they face starvation. This assessment was done before the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic which means that the number of people facing starvation could have gone up for both urban and rural populations, given the new challenges that have been brought by the pandemic. Recently, we carried out a preliminary assessment which indicated that the number of people in urban areas who are vulnerable and in need of food assistance has gone up from 2,2 million to 3,3 million and this obviously means that the number of vulnerable people in rural areas has increased. In the next two weeks, we will conduct a detailed national vulnerability assessment to ascertain the number of people who are vulnerable in rural areas and chances are high that the number has also increased. Q: How has the Covid-19 pandemic impacted on the food situation in the country? A: The Covid-19 pandemic has exacerbated and exposed Zimbabwe’s pre-existing economic challenges. Due to the national lockdown, which is necessary to prevent the spread of Covid-19, many people who rely on the informal sector have not been able to operate and generate any income. Zimbabwe has a large informal sector with individuals who depend on what they make each day for survival. So, with the lockdown they have not been able to make anything thereby leaving them vulnerable to hunger. Even those who work in the formal sector, some of them have not been going to work and they have not been earning anything to assist with their day to day needs. Also a significant number of people in the rural areas depend on farm labour and have not been able to work as they normally would, not only because of reduced farm yields, but also the national lockdown which restricts movement and crowding. These individuals have also become vulnerable as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. Many families have now begun to turn to negative coping mechanisms in efforts to fight hunger. These include selling off their livestock and properties to buy the next meal. Others are in now in huge debts as they are borrowing money from fellow friends and family members to raise money to buy food on a daily basis. The pandemic has also exposed existing challenges in terms of access to water and sanitation. Many in urban areas have to queue in long queues for many hours in order to access clean water. This has been exposing them to the risk of contracting Covid-19 because no social distancing is observed in these queues. This has also exposed young women and girls who normally fetch water to the risk of being sexually assaulted by male water barons who often control community taps and boreholes. So, we need to do more to ensure that water, sanitation and hygiene facilities are adequately provided, especially in difficult times like these. Q: The WFP Zimbabwe recently made an urgent appeal for US$130 million to sustain its food assistance and community resilience programmes through August, how much has been availed to support the organisation’s programmes? A: This appeal was made with the expectation that the country would receive a better harvest as compared to last year and that this would reduce the number of people in need of food assistance. As we are now aware, we experienced yet another drought and many were not able to get a good harvest. We have since revised that plan considering the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and the drought and we now require double that amount to support our programmes up to the end of the year. Roughly the WFP is in need of financial support of about US$260 million. We are still waiting for our national vulnerability assessment to really determine the total number of people in need of assistance, so that figure may or may not go up. Nonetheless, I would like to thank our donors who continue supporting us to offer food assistance to vulnerable communities and maintain some of our resilience programmes even at this time when the world is grappling with the Covid-19 pandemic. Q: Early this year, WFP indicated that it was currently providing food assistance to 3,4 million people and was hoping to scale up its support to four million within the next six months, how far has the organisation gone with regards to that? A: The WFP set a plan to reach 4,4 million people by April this year, but were able to reach 3,8 million people. It is our hope, through increased funding, that we will increase this number to be able to reach more vulnerable households. Q: The organisation also indicated that it was considering increasing food aid and resilience programmes in urban areas, what has been done so far in relation to this? A: When the WFP started offering humanitarian aid in Zimbabwe our major focus was on rural populations because they were the most vulnerable and food insecure. However, due to worsening economic conditions, urban populations are also becoming more and more vulnerable and in need of humanitarian aid. In response, we have launched a cash transfer programme in Epworth in Harare and so far 20 000 people have benefited from it. It is our hope that we can expand this to reach 250 000 people in urban areas by July. In the beginning, the cash transfers were being given in United States Dollars, however, we had to change to the local currency when currency reforms were introduced. We were giving US$9 per person and this was being given after we carried out an analysis which indicated that the amount would be enough to buy basics. However, prices of basic commodities have since increased and we have reviewed that amount and in July we will be offering US$14 per person. This should be enough to cater for 80 percent of the basic needs of an individual. In addition to cash transfers, we also launched mushroom farming projects in Epworth. This is part of our resilience programmes which are meant to train and empower communities with survival skills, so that they don’t over rely on aid. Many have taken up mushroom farming and once they get a good yield they are able to generate income and cater for some of their basic needs. In rural areas, we have 50 000 smallholder farmers who have been trained to farm drought resilient crops like cow peas, sorghum, wheat and millet. So far we have been receiving great feedback on these projects as the farmers were able to get great yields. It’s not just the production of crops that we are focusing on, but we are also training them in crop management, water harvesting, investing in irrigation schemes and developing community assets. Q: What mechanisms as the WFP have you come up with to ensure that you continue distributing food aid during the lockdown and safely? A: The Covid-19 pandemic has impacted on our activities as the WFP because measures to control the spread of the disease have brought about a new norm in terms of how we operate. First of all we have increased food distribution centres across the country to minimise crowding and promote ease of maintaining social distancing. We have also ensured that our partners and staff have the adequate personal protective equipment (PPE), including sanitisers, face masks and temperature checks. We are using the opportunity and access we have to rural and marginalised communities to spread information and messages on what Covid-19 is, how it spreads and how it can be prevented. All of this has been implemented in the 60 districts across the country where we distribute food aid. It is a mammoth task which requires additional resources to successfully implement. However, our priority right now is to ensure that we adopt this new way of doing things and continue offering humanitarian aid to the vulnerable who really needs assistance even though it comes with additional costs. We are also working with the government and other non-governmental organisations who offer humanitarian assistance because we have the capacity in terms of our logistic and supply chain resources. We are providing assistance in the form of planning, procurement and the distribution of humanitarian aid across the country.