Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zw ©️ THE Southern African Development Community (Sadc) yesterday warned against the discrimination of trans-border truck drivers, saying this has negatively affected the smooth flow of essential goods at a time the region is reeling from the impact of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. This comes as many countries in the Sadc region have put in place strict national lockdowns to regulate movement and curb the spread of the deadly Covid-19, with Zimbabwe having resolved to test all truck drivers passing through the country. Addressing delegates during a virtual Sadc meeting of ministers on the socio-economic impact of Covid-19 yesterday, attended by member states, including Zimbabwe represented by Foreign Affairs minister Sibusiso Moyo, the chairperson of the Sadc Council of Ministers Palamagamba Kabudi said there was need to treat truck drivers with dignity in order to ensure the smooth flow of essential goods in the region. “This is the time to strengthen our solidarity to contain the spread of the virus, while at the same time maintaining movement of essential goods and services across borders. This is the time to avoid unilateral action and increase consultations. “I would like to appeal to all of us to treat our drivers with all the respect they deserve. Yes, we take measures to contain the spread of the virus but let us not stigmatise the drivers as the spreaders of Covid-19,” Kabudi said. “Let us appreciate the risk they are taking while we are making interventions to contain the spread of the virus. Our drivers are demoralised because they are being seen as the major cause of Covid-19 and as the transporters of essential goods and services. “Once again, I appeal to all of us to treat drivers with dignity, sympathy and empathy without compromising the necessary measures to contain Covid-19,” he added. Kabudi further said that there was need for member states to implement policy reforms in efforts to enhance regional trade at a time when economies are reeling from the effects of Covid-19. “In the last Council meeting of March 2020, we had a consensus on the need for a host of measures to mitigate the effects of Covid-19 pandemic. These included scaling up of our engagement of cooperating partners to mobilise support in areas which include provision of protective equipment, medical supply, cross-border trading and the development of recovery strategies. “While progress on some of these measures has been made, still there are some challenges, especially in the implementation of the regional guidelines on harmonisation and facilitation of cross-border transportation operations across the region.
“Reports on the disruption of cross boarder transport, congestion at border posts and increase cost of transportation of goods pause a challenge to all of us. There is a need for fast tracking the harmonisation and synchronisation among member states in order to ease congestion at border posts,” Kabudi said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He added that solidarity within the region is key if countries are to conquer the socio-economic effects of Covid-19.
“The condition of any organisation is tested during trying times and this is the time to show the world we are together in this. This pandemic is likely not to end anytime soon and, in the region, we have to practice safe trade and transport facilitation while we take measures to contain the pandemic. “This pandemic should now fuel trade within the region. We should now contact our industries to produce PPEs and sanitisers and trade in the region,” Kabudi said. Sadc executive secretary Stergomena Tax said Covid-19 requires special and innovative ways of doing business to alleviate poverty and hunger in the region.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw