Austin Karonga
SPORTS WRITER
karongaa@dailynews.co.zw THE football fraternity was plunged into mourning on Thursday following the death of former WhaWha FC chairperson Musa Ntonga. She passed away at her home in Guinea Fowl in Gweru aged 44. Ntonga became the first woman in local football to ascend to such a post when the Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Services (ZPCS) side was promoted to the top flight in 2015. “Sad day as we mourn the death of…Ntonga. She served as a distinguished leader, an outstanding football advocate and a warm and caring individual. Our sincere condolences go to her family, Whawha FC and the entire football family,” the Premier Soccer League said in a statement yesterday. Following Whawha’s relegation from the top flight after only a single season, Ntonga continued to make huge strides in the male-dominated field. In 2016, she ran for the chairperson post in the Zifa Central Region but eventually lost the race to Stanley Chapeta. “As women, we are emotionally attached to what we do. When we start a thing, we want to see it through to perfection. Even in Shona they have a saying musha mukadzi meaning without the touch of a woman, no home will be successful,” Ntonga told this publication a month before the 2016 elections. “This is an area which people generally thought only men but I am a football person and an administrator. So I fear not since I have been subjected to stereotyping and stigmatisation because there are still some men that still do not believe that women can lead. “They think our place is confined to the kitchen. But for me, I want to bring that sparkling feminine touch to the Central Region, bringing in long lasting professionalism.”
Premiership champions FC Platinum also paid tribute to Ntonga in a statement yesterday. “These have indeed been very dark hours for the football fraternity especially the Central Region. The FC Platinum family are saddened to hear of the passing of Ntonga. Those who came in contact with her will attest that we have been robbed,” Pure Platinum Play said. “She was strong, bold, a cheerleader to all those that she led and a true survivor. This gap will surely be hard to fill. The FC Platinum family mourns with the Ntonga family and may the Lord comfort and strengthen you during this dark time. Rest easy Musa and fly with the Angels.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });