Myles Matarise
STAFF WRITER  THE Econet group yesterday handed over personal protective equipment (PPE) worth $730 738 to two of the country’s major Covid-19 referral hospitals, with three more hospitals scheduled to receive their consignments early next week.  The funds were raised by the public in response to an appeal made by the group for donations towards the fight against the coronavirus pandemic.  Econet, through its Higherlife Foundation, then used the donations — made by over 8 000 individual donors through an EcoCash merchant code and Steward Bank accounts created for the purpose — to purchase over 2 000 PPE consisting of PVC overalls, over shoes, latex gloves, goggles and disposable surgical masks, among other protective items.  The donations were handed over at brief ceremonies held at the Wilkins Hospital Covid-19 referral centre in Harare and at Thorngrove Hospital in Bulawayo, where they are expected to be used by frontline healthcare workers.
Similar handovers are set for Gweru, Mutare and Masvingo general hospitals next week.  Econet group chief executive Douglas Mboweni commended the public for its response to a worthy cause. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });   Higherlife Foundation chief executive Kennedy Mubaiwa also commended the public for supporting the fight against the deadly virus that has infected over 5 million people around the world.  “The outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic has seriously impacted societies and put a huge burden on healthcare delivery systems and an even bigger strain on frontline healthcare workers,” Mubaiwa said in a statement.  “In many developing countries, including Zimbabwe, where healthcare delivery services are not as resilient as they should be, the pressure on frontline healthcare staff is immense.  “Which is why the public’s response to our call to strengthen our national healthcare infrastructure and support frontline medical staff fighting the Covid-19 epidemic is so encouraging and must be applauded.   Accepting the donation on behalf of the Harare City Health Services Department at the handover in Harare, Wilkins Hospital Medical Superintendent Hilda Bara said the public donation of the equipment through the coordination of the Econet group would go a long way in the fight against Covid-19.   “Most importantly, we commend the generality of Zimbabweans for responding to the fund mobilisation call by Econet Group in the common fight against Covid-19,” said Bara.  Mubaiwa said that the donation platforms made available by Cassava Smartech’s EcoCash and Steward Bank remained open to receive public support towards fighting the disease, via the EcoCash merchant Code 018533, or Steward Bank Special Accounts 1037225367 or US$ Account 1037226811.