Jeffrey Muvundusi
in BULAWAYO THE 13-episode situational comedy (sitcom) Indlalifa (The Heir) which features award-winning local musicians Tebza and Paulla Paloma has resumed airing on ZBC-TV after it was forced off air because of coronavirus (Covid-19). The sitcom was off air for four weeks during which period it was showcased online as the producers tried to cover the gap filled by its absence on air. The sitcom, a product of AJV AFRIART Entertainment Company in conjunction with ZBC-TV, showcases once a week and has been put together by talented local artists The production’s author Jeffrey Sibanda confirmed the development. “Indlalifa has resumed airing on ZBC-TV after it had gone on a four weeks forced break due to the current Covid-19 situation. It was on episode 7. “We got a lot of enquiries from viewers and followers when we were on break which made us realise how much people had grown to love the sitcom hence we resumed our shoot and followed our production plan, which was moving the production to Makokoba Township as it reaches half season,” Sibanda told Daily News. He said the plan seems to be working as it is helping people relate more with the production through its township life themes. Sibanda said since its return to the screen they have been receiving positive feedback on various platforms “which is motivating the production to move forward regardless of the dire economic situation in the country at the moment.” Sibanda said they have incorporated the pandemic as a way to entertain the masses in time when the spirits of the public at large are down. The sitcom is now on episode 10 with only three to go before they move on to Season Two.
The production is produced by Allen Chigumira, created and written by Sibanda. It stars award-winning musician Paloma, Prince Luphahla (Afri-Art Programmes Coordinator, Tebogo “Tebza” Moyo (award- winning Wazkhoth’lihlo hit maker, Clinton Ndlovu (actor), Michelle Mabuza (model) and Kelvin Sibanda (veteran artist). googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });