Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw DYNAMOS utility player Godknows Murwira says he is now relieved after undergoing successful knee surgery last week. Murwira injured his knee late last year before it aggravated during pre-season training, bringing about disruptions to his virtual ever-present status under Tonderai Ndiraya, having arrived on loan from FC Platinum. The 26-year-old had barely missed a game after arriving mid-last season to boost the Glamour Boys, who were desperately fighting against relegation. There were fears Murwira would not even feature in the first half of this season due to the extent of the injury.
If truth be told, his career was under threat as the injury had the possibility of ending his playing days. Murwira’s absence could have been greatly felt due to his ability to fill in a number of roles across the entire back line and in midfield. However, the Covid-19 pandemic, which has had an unprecedented impact on the sporting world, at least enabled the player to undergo the necessary procedure although it will keep him on the sidelines for at least six weeks. And with no clear dates when the season will start, chances are very high the former Ngezi Platinum Stars player will be ready when things return to normal. Once he has healed from the surgery, the utility player will need to undergo physiotherapy until he is able to return to full training. Murwira is not the only Dynamos player to have benefited from the delay caused by the coronavirus-induced lockdown. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Captain Partson Jaure is also recovering after successful head and facial surgery. The defender, who re-signed for the Glamour Boys at the start of the year, was involved in an accident in March which saw him undergoing a delicate surgery. The process, because of its delicateness, required huge sums of money.
In the end, the DeMbare executive pooled resources to finance the surgery. Jaure was also bailed out after his Warriors teammates based in Europe and South Africa came together at the behest of the Footballers’ Union of Zimbabwe and raised a further US$5 000. At the moment, he is undergoing physiotherapy in order to fully recover from the surgery and it will take another six weeks before he is back to full fitness. After a disappointing 2019 campaign in which the Glamour Boys were below their best, Ndiraya embarked on a massive recruitment drive which saw the club signing close to 20 players ahead of the new campaign.
Jaure, together with Nkosi Mhlanga, Lennox Mutsetse, Tanaka Chidhobha and Taimon Mvula were the Glamour Boys’ early signings. They went on to snatch the former ZPC Kariba duo of Sylvester Appiah and Tino Chiunye.
DeMbare also signed Barnabas Mushunje, Jean Mutudza, David Temwanjira, Albert Eonde and King Nadolo. However, the Harare giants will have to wait a bit longer before they can field their newly-assembled squad as the start of the season is not yet confirmed.