WITH the whole country under lockdown for more than a month now amid government’s efforts to curb the spread of the coronavirus, more Zimbabweans are finding it difficult to survive owing to food challenges. When restrictions were imposed to prevent the spread of the lethal virus, drought had already left millions vulnerable and the lockdown — though necessary in saving lives — has come with even more hardships. So dire is the food situation among Zimbabweans whose majority — over 95 percent — are unemployed that even elected officials who are supposed to be representing them have become fed up with their constituents knocking at their doors almost daily looking for food. Last week, Zanu PF MP for Goromonzi West constituency Energy Mutodi complained that hungry villagers in Domboshawa were disturbing his sleep by knocking at his gate in the early morning begging for food. “Stampede for food. These families in Domboshawa interrupted my sleep in the chilly Sunday morning as they jostled and shoved each other by the gate to the MP’s house, expecting anything they can take home to save starving children. Help someone during this lockdown. Donate food. The little I got, they took it all. I am appealing to well-wishers to help me feed these people,” the deputy Information minister said on Twitter. Mutodi also posted a picture showing restive villagers queuing at his homestead, waiting for food handouts.
But government has pledged to expand social protection programmes to mitigate the effects of Covid-19 and drought on people’s livelihoods. Nearly eight million people, more than half of Zimbabwe’s population, is in need of food aid in the country due to recurring droughts. To alleviate challenges people are facing, Public Service minister, Paul Mavima, told the Daily News on Sunday the government is scaling up social protection programmes, which include grain distribution to vulnerable communities, cash transfers for cereal, public assistance cash transfer for Covid-19 relief as well as harmonised social cash transfers. In addition, Mavima said the government is also scaling up child protection services, provisions for the physically challenged as well as support to ensure the safety for those rendering essential services. He said because Covid-19 and drought had rendered the majority of citizens vulnerable and looking up to the State for support and protection, 7 114 tonnes of grain were distributed to vulnerable communities in all the eight rural provinces during the month of April 2020, while nearly $4 million was disbursed as cash for cereal beneficiaries to over 21 000 households in Bulawayo and Harare, over $4,7 million in public assistance was spread over 26 140 beneficiary households in Bindura, Kariba, Kwekwe, Gwanda, Plummet, Shurugwi, Mvuma and Beitbridge. However, the Zimbabwe Peace Project (ZPP), in its latest report, said the government efforts have been rendered useless owing to partisan distribution of the aid as well as discrimination. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “In Manicaland Province, Zanu PF members seized the opportunity to punish those perceived and known to be opposition supporters through politicisation of government food programmes. “These incidences were recorded in Mutare Central and Dangamvura/Chikanga constituencies. During the first week of the lockdown, government announced it would disburse $600 million to a million vulnerable households and the money (about $200 per family) was to be disbursed through the Department of Social Welfare, which was to assess vulnerability and compile a list of deserving families,” part of the ZPP report reads. While Mavima’s deputy Lovemore Matuke said in a recent interview that disbursements were being done under his ministry, Finance minister Mthuli Ncube has contradicted that position, saying instead his ministry had used a ‘‘sophisticated algorithm system’’ to determine who should benefit from the funds.
“Some were not happy at how the ruling party was interfering with the process and in Beitbridge the local MP announced that more Zanu PF supporters were supposed to receive the disbursements. “Despite the reports of corruption and discord in the disbursement of the funds, the fact still remains that $180, which is equivalent to about US$5, is not enough to support a household for even a day. “The money is just enough to buy six loaves of bread, or a kilogramme of meat. Once again, government failed on transparency and accountability,” the ZPP said. The Covid-19 induced hunger has been compounded by economic instability, poor rainfall, and livestock and crop losses which have severely undermined food security in Zimbabwe. According to the most recent Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis released in March at the peak of the lean season — the period of the year when food is scarcest —approximately 4, 3 million people in rural Zimbabwe currently face worse levels of acute food insecurity and require emergency food assistance. The analysis also shows that apart from drought, localised flooding and rising food prices remain among the primary drivers of acute food insecurity for rural households. According to the Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS Net), in 2020 continued lower-than-average rainfall has led to a decrease in cropped areas, resulting in poor harvests of staple cereals. The FEWS Net said because confirmed cases of Covid-19 have been reported in all countries across the southern Africa region and that all governments have implemented restrictions to limit the movement of people to prevent the spread of the disease, it is likely to have an impact on livelihoods and markets for both rural and urban households as these restrictions continue for at least the medium-term. “Moreover, should governments restrict economic activities along borders due to concerns over the spread of Covid-19, this will likely further restrict the flow of goods, constraining market supply in countries that rely on imports, and sustain high prices across the region. “The resulting constraints on purchasing power for many poor households across the region translate into higher levels of food insecurity in the coming months,” FEWS Net said.