THERE is a popular quote “when you’ve reached the top, send the elevator back down for the others”. It simply means being prepared to help those below you on the career ladder so that they might also enjoy success. As the world races to achieve gender parity and equality, Ruvimbo Nyikadzino’s vision is to uplift females — to create a growing community of women who thrive in their vocations and positively impact communities. Her chosen vocation prompted her to establish the SheRoars Zimbabwe Network to allow women to share their stories and inspire each other. SheRoars Zimbabwe is a world where women challenge the narratives of inequality and in so doing unleash their full potential and that of the world. “I have read quite a lot of literature about women worldwide and noticed that locally we were not celebrating women’s achievements enough. There are a number of women doing marvellous work, but their stories are not recognised, and not only that, these women also have unique stories to share which empowers other women,” said Nyikadzino who did her ‘‘O’’ and ‘‘A’’ Levels at Mufakose High 2 and Mufakose High 1 schools respectively. Nyikadzino, who holds an arts degree she obtained from the University of Zimbabwe in 2016, added that SheRoars brings young women together from various backgrounds and is biased towards young women graduates, mainly those seeking employment. According to World Bank, girls’ education goes beyond getting them to school, but it is about ensuring that girls learn the socio-emotional and life skills necessary to navigate and adapt to a changing world; make decisions about their own lives; and contribute to their communities and the world. Back home, Nyikadzino, through SheRoars, has engaged 800 young women since its launch last year, organising conferences that attracted bigwigs like Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa and socialites Pokello Nare and broadcast journalist Ruvheneko Parirenyatwa to share their success stories and inspire other women. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Nyikadzino added that while there are still stereotypes that young women cannot lead, females should keep educating and pulling each other up for opportunities. “I am really grateful for the great support from several women who have offered to come and share their stories which have in turn inspired young women to start-up businesses, to believe in the abilities that they carry. “Currently, we are not only advocating for opportunities for women, but exhibiting what women can do and do better. In the 21st Century one can agree to the assertion that if you educate a girl child, she will educate the whole community. Efforts to educate a woman are not only to empower an individual, but to bring empowerment to other generations.” Nyikadzino, who is also a producer at Sly Media, an online television, added that the massive dominance of the patriarchal system was a huge barrier to the emancipation and participation of women in key decision-making, adding that it is imperative to applaud the continuous efforts that are being made to empower women.