©️ THINGS appear to be going from bad to worse for Nelson Chamisa, pictured, and his allies, with the High Court ruling yesterday that the MDC Alliance does not have an independent right of existence under the law — effectively muting the raging public debate that it is a duly constituted political party, the Daily News reports. This comes after the Supreme Court recently upheld last year’s decision by the High Court which decided that Chamisa’s hotly-disputed ascendancy to the leadership of the MDC in 2018 had violated the party’s constitution — and was, therefore, null and void. It also comes after the MDC’s interim leadership led by Thokozani Khupe successfully recalled Chalton Hwende (Kuwadzana), Tabitha Khumalo (MDC proportional representative), Prosper Mutseyami (Dangamvura) and Midlands senator Lillian Timveos from Parliament recently — as it flexed its muscles and demonstrated that it is fully in charge of the beleaguered party for now. Yesterday, the High Court dismissed with costs an application where the MDC Alliance sought to stop the MDC’s interim leadership from recalling more legislators from Parliament, while also ruling that the Alliance was not a party. High Court judge Tawanda Chitapi ruled that the MDC Alliance was not a legal persona with the capacity to sue and be sued — and thus had no legal right to bring the application before the court. Chitapi also said the MDC-A had failed to produce tangible evidence of a constitution or other legal instruments showing that it was a legal persona. He said further that while the organisation was a political party as defined in the Electoral Act — which simply identifies a political party as a political organisation — the MDC-A did not have a legal instrument conferring it juristic status. However, he added, the pact had a timeframe and was crafted to expire after five years from the date of people being elected into office, and did not have a constitution guiding its existence. Chitapi also said the MDC-A’s lawyers had failed to rebut submissions made by the MDC-T regarding the fact that the MDC-A was not a legal persona. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Among the other points that the MDC had raised included the fact that Hwende had no authority to represent the party or its MPs, and that there was material non-disclosure of some information… — a bid to mislead the court. Soon after the handing down of the judgment, the MDC-A said it was going to reflect on the way forward, while making the point that a political party was not determined by courts. But professor of World Politics at the London School of Oriental and African Studies, Stephen Chan, said the court outcome would have damaging effects on the country’s opposition party and leave Zanu PF with no formidable challengers. Respected University of Zimbabwe political science lecturer, Eldred Masunungure, said while the ruling had detrimental legal implications for Chamisa, its political effect was minimal. “The ruling is devastating for the MDC only as far as its legal standing is concerned. I suspect they will appeal to the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court, now that they are a standalone entity.
“While the legal standing of the MDC-T has been greatly enhanced by the ruling, it does not translate to its political standing,” he said. “I think he will form another party and move on. Some MPs desperate to save their perks and salaries will desert him, but the real politics will happen via elections,” he said.
Analyst Rashweat Mukundu also said the High Court judgment would not in itself give more support to Khupe. “The judgment does not change any material facts on the political reality on the ground, which is that there is now a separation between Khupe, those MPs and Nelson Chamisa. This comes as Khupe and her allies have been involved in a hammer and tongs tussle with Chamisa’s faction ever since the death of the MDC’s much-loved founding father, Morgan Tsvangirai, from colon cancer in February 2018. The fighting has intensified following the Supreme Court’s ruling in March this year, which voided Chamisa’s disputed leadership of the party. The ruling upheld last year’s decision by the High Court which had said Chamisa’s ascendancy to the leadership of the MDC had violated the main opposition party’s constitution. The net effect of the unanimous judgment that was handed down by a trio of Supreme Court judges — Paddington Garwe, Bharat Patel and Antoinette Guvava — was that Chamisa’s MDC’s presidency was unconstitutional, and therefore null and void. In addition to installing Khupe as interim party president, the court also ordered her to convene an extraordinary MDC congress to elect a new leadership within three months — which key gathering is tentatively set for July 31.
The court also re-instated Douglas Mwonzora and Morgen Komichi to the positions of secretary-general and chairperson respectively. Speaking to the Daily News’s sister publication, the Daily News on Sunday last weekend, the MDC’s former chairperson Lovemore Moyo described the mindless bloodletting in the party as a useless “power struggle”.
He said pointedly that the feud had “absolutely nothing to do with serving the long-suffering people of Zimbabwe”. “My advice is very simple. Put the interests of the people of Zimbabwe first. Your personal egos and interests will always be accommodated if you deliver electoral victory in plebiscites.
“What you are doing to yourselves, tearing each other apart, especially on social media, makes Zanu PF smile. Focus on the ball,” he added.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw