UNITED Kingdom-based musician Daniel ‘‘Decibel’’ Mazhandu will for now be releasing single records as he has no intention to release a full album anytime soon. The Daily News on Sunday Lifestyle Writer, Tinashe Sibanda recently caught up with the musician for a catch up on his current life and below are excerpts of the interview: Q: How and when did you discover your musical talent? A: During my early teens would be the time I became aware of it as a talent as my friends commented and bragged about me as their MC.  However, if this is concerning when exactly I started singing, well it is as long as I remember. I made up songs about playing, doing chores and just about everything. I would be the worst kid driving on a long journey because I would look out the window and sing about what is happening out there. I was in school choirs, church choirs and never thought anything of it really until during my early teens when I took it seriously. Q: What are you currently working on musically? A: Just as always, I’m constantly writing and people only get to see the tip of the iceberg. As of now I am working on a few new projects earmarked for release. Q: Are you into any other business besides music? A: Yes. I export musical equipment, scientific equipment and mining equipment to Africa. It is really a philanthropic venture because there is a lot of technology here and being from Africa myself I know how technology is hard to get so I am just playing my small part in helping Africa catch up with the rest of the world. Q: Name something your fans would be amazed to know about you? A: Oh it’s like I can’t shock anyone. There are these great expectations on me from day one! When I think I have done something amazing people are always like, “Aah, we knew you could do that.” One thing for certain is I stopped taking alcohol. Q: What challenges have you faced in your musical career and how did you overcome them? A: When I left Zimbabwe my releases did not reach the people so I submitted to radio stations but they simply didn’t play them. It was as if there was some conspiracy but I would rather not speculate. It is what it is, very strange though. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The effect was immediate, I had no way to reach my fan base with airplay out of the question, but the upsurge of social media came to the rescue. Now fans come straight to the source.  My other challenge has been reaching out and raising awareness that I am active and how to access my material still remains work in progress but my path is clear now. No one can keep a good man down and nobody can stop Reggae.