Blessing Masakadza
LIFESTYLE WRITER
masakadzab@dailynews.co.zw CELEBRATED Afro-fusion outfit Mokoomba will today represent the country in the MTN Bushfire Festival.
Dubbed the #KeepTheFireBurning Digital Festival, Mokoomba will join other singers across the continent with proceeds to be directed to charity. The festival also features musicians from South Africa, Eswathini, Uganda, Kenya, Canada and the United States among several other countries with all the proceeds going towards helping Young Heroes and boMake Rural Projects, so they can continue their much-needed Covid-19 relief programmes. Mokoomba are known for their electric performances which they recently exhibited in an online show.
Organisers of the event have described the group as “undoubtedly one of the most entertaining and exciting bands to come out of Africa in recent times. With high-energy performances, infectious harmonies and irresistible dance music, these incredibly talented musicians will have you up on your feet!” Tomorrow, singers Jah Prayzah and Ammara Brown will also participate in another continental concert dubbed ‘‘Covid-19 Hope For Africa’’. They will join other African musicians such as Diamond Platnumz, Betty G, 2Baba, Akothee and Banky W.
Jah Prayzah has worked with singers such as Diamond Platnumz and Betty G whom he collaborated with at Coke Studio Africa. The concert is aimed at raising awareness in the fight against Covid-19 and Multi Choice has partnered with the One Africa Global on the event. Last week, songstress Selmor Mtukudzi, participated in another concert aimed at celebrating Africa Day and raising awareness on Covid-19. The organisers of the Bush Festival have promised fireworks at the event which will be pay per view.
“Expect electrifying performances from some of the finest African and international artists. “This event will not be streamed on any public network, like Facebook, YouTube. The only way to enjoy some of the most electrifying performances is to get a ticket and access the stream on the Howler platform,” they said.