Tinashe Sibanda
Lifestyle Writer
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw ©️ IN an exciting development, local hip-hop singer Edmore “Eddy G” Godo, 31, has signed under the management of Australia-based Afrimarque Music Group. His first ever professional release was the track Usatye which he recorded at Tony Fresh’s Kunta Records in Chitungwiza featuring the Ward 24 duo despite having to do it underground as his parents were not supportive of his hip-hop career. In 2008, while in Rusape, Eddy G built a personal home studio through which he used to convince other singers to pursue the hip-hop culture. It was during those days that he got his first successful commercial success with the track Vhaira Neni featuring Trevor Dongo and Lufa from Project Fam and produced by Sanii Makhalima; that was part of a singles collection under the stable. Eddy G then went on to record with various acclaimed urban groove musicians like Mapfumo, Paida and Umsindo among others. Early this year Eddy G released the song Unondiitisa as a teaser from his comeback album titled Through My Eyes set to be released later in the year. In an interview with the Daily News Eddy G said he is assuring his fans that he is now back to stay and that the time he was away made him realise how much he wanted to follow his passion more than anything else. Unondiitisa is a song that depicts the life of a couple which is troubled by domestic violence, cheating and lack of trust. The wife complains to the guy about her concerns and she confesses her true love for him despite his crooked character. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The singer said the track was inspired by real life events in the life of one of his friends and he wrote it after he had helped quench a fight the friend had with his wife. Eddy G then got the feeling that as an artist he is entitled to play his role in the fight against domestic violence. The upcoming album will have various tracks including Africa, Ishe Wangu featuring Simba the Lion, Unondiitisa, Long gone Ex, One Night Stand and Cheater featuring Poptain (another domestic violence project). Speaking on the current global Covid-19 pandemic, he said it is indeed such a difficult season for everyone but he has chosen not to be hindered by the situation. “I’m working with new blood, mainly focusing on raw unidentified talent like Poptain, Tashley Keys, Prosper, Soulz Doc, Tnae and I have also worked with big guys such as Simba the Lion, Flexxo and Leonard Mapfumo.     Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw