POINT Black Africa, a digital content and marketing company, has partnered with Goethe-Zentrum Harare/ Zimbabwe German Society on a new collaborative project set to promote Zimbabwean artistes and change the landscape of popular music in the country. The project dubbed “Pungwe Sessions Vol. 2” will feature 13 songs from over a dozen Zimbabwean artistes such as Simba Tagz, Nutty O, Garry Mapanzure GZE, ASAPH, Boss Pumacol, Chengeto, Garry Mapanzure, Soko Matemai, King Kandoro, Michael Chiunda Sylent Nqo, Thaiwanda and Shashl. The album is set for release on June 5. The project was produced in full by platinum-selling producer Rymez who worked with every artiste in the studio providing the same invaluable guidance that he has offered to the numerous chart-topping superstars he has worked with. Pungwe Sessions Vol. 2 is a follow up the 2014 offering that Rymez produced in partnership with Point Black’s managing director, Phil Chard. The initial Pungwe Sessions was a revolutionary project for Zimbabwean hip-hop that produced hits such as Phil Chiyangwa by Rymez and Jnr Brown. The song immediately shot to the top of the radio charts and held the number one spot on ZiFM charts for 10 weeks. The producer, who is known for crafting chart topping hits for Stefflon Don, Wiley, Tinie Tempah and Sean Paul travelled to his birth country of Zimbabwe in late September 2019 to record the album over an eight-day writing and recording camp that was attended by some of Zimbabwe’s most promising artistes. The roster paired established artistes like Simba Tagz who has production credits with Mr. Eazi, Wande Coal and Wizkid with newcomers like Michael Chiunda, Nutty O ad Soko Matemai who gained invaluable knowledge and insights from the collaborations. The camp was organised by Point Black with the assistance and support of Goethe-Zentrum Harare/ Zimbabwe German Society. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Zimbabwe has a wealth of talented artistes who could benefit from investment and education. “The goals of this album and the writing sessions were to facilitate a greater level of collaboration amongst our artistes and to give them one on one sessions with a globally acclaimed producer who would educate them on how to approach their craft as a brand. “There is empirical evidence that shows how much contemporary arts can contribute to the GDP of a country,” said Chard.