HARARE – The 2020 High Schools Debate Challenge (HiDC) meant to be held on May 21 has moved dates to July 3 to 7 this year. The competition will this year take place online. The HiDC is a non-profit making organisation which aims at educating the youth and children on issues of child abuse and rights through workshops, seminars, public speaking and debate competitions. In an interview with the Daily News HiDC cofounder and director National Marwa said: “This year’s event was supposed to be held on 21 May at St Dominics High School in Mutare but we have unfortunately been affected by the on-going lockdown.” Marwa said although these changes have been made because of the Covid-19 pandemic, the HiDC competitions for debate and public speaking will this year be conducted online in July. He said this year’s national event will be hosted by Grace Mugabe High School for four days in December. “In our national competitions we normally have over 20 schools nationwide taking part but for the upcoming provincials we expect not less than 10 schools,” Marwa said. “For Harare we normally expect schools like Harare High, Kuwadzana 2 High, Trust Academy, Mother Touch Group of Schools, Wise Owl Group of Schools, Seke 1 High, BnP Study Centre, Borrowdale Academy, Reekworth High School, Grace Mugabe High School and Friendship High school.” Marwa said at each competition the winners can expect prices in terms of medals, trophies, certificates, T-shirts and other prizes. They will also provide food for staff members if it is a provincial competition. He said the topics given to students during competitions will be based on child rights and the organisation also runs debate sessions in Parliament for the youth on the same subject of child rights. The teams who win the national tournament then represent HiDC in the Pan African Universities Debate Championships every December. HiDC was established in March 2018 and debate and public speaking competitions were held nation-wide in 2018 and 2019. This year the HiDC runs under the theme: “Unmasking the Right of Rights.”