Tendai Kamhungira
and Vasco Chaya
STAFF WRITERSTHE Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights (ZLHR) has raised fears that three MDC officials, including Harare West MP Joanna Mamombe, could have been abducted after she and other party youths staged a flash demonstration in Warren Park, Harare on Wednesday.  This also comes after Zimbabwe Republic Police spokesperson Paul Nyathi yesterday said they had not arrested the trio, adding that they were not in their custody. “Their lawyer has been in contact with officer commanding police, Harare province and was told to bring his clients for an interview with regards to the above cited matter. This is the official position,” Nyathi said.  However, the trio’s lawyers, Jeremiah Bamu and Agency Gumbo — who are ZLHR members — yesterday wrote to police commissioner-general Godwin Matanga, demanding to know their clients’ whereabouts.  The clients had reportedly communicated with the lawyers that they had been arrested at a check point on their way from Warren Park on Wednesday.  Mamombe was arrested together with MDC youth assembly vice chairperson Cecilia Chimbiri, secretary for policy and youth deputy organising secretary Netsai Marowa.  The letter to Matanga also comes after ZLHR executive director Roselyn Hanzi posted on micro-blogging site Twitter yesterday, claiming that they had searched a number of police stations across Harare and could not locate the trio, raising fears that they could have been abducted.  She said the lawyers were going to file a habeas corpus application before the High Court, to compel “those illegally holding or detaining” the trio to bring them before the court.  The MDC Alliance also demanded the immediate release of the three.   The alleged trio’s abduction also received widespread condemnation yesterday, with some organisations raising concerns. “Concerned to hear lawyers still not told of whereabouts of three female MDC officials reportedly arrested in Harare. Urge authorities to use their resources to locate urgently in line with security services’ obligation to act at all times in line with Zimbabwe’s law and Constitution,” the United Kingdom embassy to Zimbabwe said yesterday.  The European Union in Zimbabwe also added its voice to the issue.  “We are concerned that three female MDC officials remain missing after they were reportedly arrested in Harare yesterday. We urge authorities to swiftly and in line with constitutional and legal obligations assist lawyers and relatives to establish their whereabouts and wellbeing.”