Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw©️ CHAMPIONS FC Platinum are not contemplating a pay cut for their Dutch coach Hendrikus Pieter de Jongh during the coronavirus (Covid-19)-induced lockdown.  De Jongh has been in charge of Pure Platinum Play since the start of the year after arriving from a short but successful stint with Highlanders towards the end of 2019.  Ever since the novel virus broke out, a number of Castle Lager Premiership teams have been hit by significant financial woes.
Zimbabwe has been in lockdown since March 30 as health officials battle to contain the spread of the virus.  The government on Saturday announced that the lockdown had been extended indefinitely.
This has created a huge headache for the Premier Soccer League since the 2020 season should have kicked off in March.
Remaining afloat for most clubs during such uncertain times is now a big challenge because of the huge running costs associated with fulfilling their contractual obligations to players, coaches and staff.  Last week, Highlanders and their coach Mark Harrison reached an agreement to suspend his contract which saw him return to his native England.  Matters were made worse for the Bulawayo giants after their main sponsor, NetOne, did not renew their funding deal for the 2020 season. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Several other PSL teams are also finding it difficult to pay their players’ salaries owing to Covid-19.
Most teams are now contemplating pay cuts for the players and coaches but that is not the case with Pure Platinum Play, one of the few clubs, who are financially stable. “We are aren’t considering any pay cut for now,” FC Platinum president Fabian Mashingaidze confirmed to the Daily News yesterday.  Apart from being financially stable, FC Platinum are set for an earlier-than-expected financial windfall from the Confederation of African Football (Caf) for their participation in the African Champions League.  Caf recently announced that they have started disbursing the final tranche of prize money to participating clubs in Caf interclub competitions for the 2019/20 season earlier than usual to help them cope with the financial burden of the coronavirus pandemic.
Clubs usually receive their financial entitlements for the interclub competitions at the end of the season.  FC Platinum represented the country in the Champions League where they reached the group stages for a second successive season.  The Zimbabwe champions finished last in a group that also had Al Ahly (Egypt), Etoile du Sahel (Tunisia) and Al-Hilal (Sudan) with a single point.   “The minimum guaranteed for clubs participating in the Total Caf Champions League is US$550 000 and US$275 000 for the Total Caf Confederation Cup.  Meanwhile, Caf says it will continue to monitor the pandemic situation closely and work with the relevant authorities, including the Wealth Health Organisation, on the impact of the virus on the continent and announce developments to competitions at the appropriate time.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 