Vasco Chaya
and Fungi Kwaramba
STAFF WRITERS ©️ THREE MDC youth leaders — who disappeared earlier this week after staging a demonstration in Harare — yesterday narrated harrowing tales that they said they suffered at the hands of their tormentors, the Daily News reports. This comes as police say they are probing the matter, which senior MDC officials are blaming on President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s government. The three main opposition youth leaders — Harare West MP Joanna Mamombe, Cecilia Chimbiri and Netsai Marowa — led a flash demonstration in Harare’s high density suburb of Warren Park on Wednesday, before they were reported to have been arrested by authorities. Yesterday, the trio — which appeared to be in shock and pain — told the media how they had ended up in the hands of suspected State security operatives, who allegedly went on to assault them with guns and sticks during a “horrendous interrogation”. While Chimbiri was able to narrate her ordeal, Mamombe and Marowa just stared blankly at Nelson Chamisa — who was accompanied by Tendai Biti — during a visit at the private hospital in Harare where they are getting treatment. The trio’s lawyer Jeremiah Bhamu said the youth leaders had been found in Mashonaland Central on Thursday evening, after they were allegedly dumped at Muchapondwa Business Centre, which is popularly known as kwaSupa. “When we got there, they were in a terrible state. They looked emotionally unstable. We got there around midnight and they were in a terrible state and half naked. “Police are saying they are keen to investigate how they were abducted,” he said. Police said yesterday they were investigating the matter, to establish what exactly had happened to the MDC youth leaders. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Police are conducting investigations to establish what transpired on May 13 after the flash demonstration in Warren Park 1. “It is only after full investigations that the police will be in a position to pin-point what actually happened between May 13 and 15. “This includes the movement of demonstrators, their associates and subsequent location of the trio at Muchapondwa Business Centre,” the police said. However, Chamisa told journalists that Mnangagwa and his government were allegedly responsible for the attacks on the party’s youth leaders. “These people are doing it on behalf of Mnangagwa and what makes it so obvious is that Mnangagwa has never condemned it. Not a single investigation or arrest has been done,” he added. Government spokesperson Nick Mangwana said authorities were investigating what happened to the MDC youth leaders. Meanwhile, Chimbiri’s father Henry claimed that his daughter was initially taken to Harare Central Police Station by police in uniform on Wednesday, before they were allegedly smuggled out from there by men in balaclavas. “When I tried to call her later, her phone was not available. I went to the police station, but they claimed that they had not seen them. “We then started looking for them around police stations, but to no avail. “Later on Thursday, we received calls from some people in Mashonaland Central who said they had found three females who were crying,” Henry added. Mamombe’s mother, Kudzai Chiwadza, also claimed that her daughter had been tortured severely — adding that at one time she was thrown out of a vehicle. “When I saw Joana she was unable to talk. Now, she is complaining of a headache.
“One of the girls said Joana was the primary target of the torture. I hope she has no internal injuries considering what she went through,” Chiwadza said.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 