HARARE-BASED craft maker Rumbidzai Lona Mandizha, 40, believes more could be done to promote handcrafts.
Based in Tynwald North suburb in Harare, Mandizha grew up loving the art of handcraft and she has managed to nurture it to be her artistic profession and inspiration. It was from then that with the help of her mother and sisters, they formed a ‘‘workshop’’ where they would all knit together to help with the family’s sustenance. Mandizha was always curious, bringing new ideas and innovations to keep their craft relevant to the market trends. She drew her inspiration from her mother, the late Oliver Mtukudzi and the Tonga women in Binga who all have firm roots in tradition and refused to dilute their art. She is also inspired by promoting an Afrocentric identity and enjoys making “proudly Zimbabwean” crafts which maintain a sense of pride in her being Zimbabwean. She said in Zimbabwe she faces challenges in exposure as locals do not respond to local art as it is considered more of a pastime. The market also does not pay well as there are a lot of mass produced goods. It needs one to appreciate the art of handcraft, hence exactly why they are priced higher than mere machine made products. She feels most local artists are not getting as much exposure and have to source their own markets which is quite a challenge. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Her wish is for more training workshops and markets to be opened so as to promote local handcraft and exchange programmes with international artists. “Nothing is more encouraging than doing what you love and earning a living from it; and the fact that I have the freedom to work from home while not undermining my motherly duties to my family. Nothing could be more precious to me than instilling my values and passing on the gift to my children as my mom did to me.” “I am a single mother to a 22-year-old daughter and 13-year-old son; also blessed with a three-year-old grandson and they are indeed my reason for the hustle,” she said. 