Tinashe Sibanda
Lifestyle Writer
sibandat@dailynews.co.zw URBAN grooves musician Enock “Nox” Guni, pictured, has commenced online lockdown acoustic performances while being supported by his brother Tyfah Guni and their friends. Last week, their online show had nearly 30 000 views and their next show will be hosted today.
In an interview with the Daily News he said: “What we are doing is that every Tuesday we are going live on my official Instagram page, Zimbo Live, Mvengemvenge and Zim Celebs Facebook pages performing for the people during this lockdown.” He said their performance set is made up of a DJ, pianist and guitarist together with the guest musician. Guni said since hitting over 30 000 views in the first show, he has decided to commercialise this initiative by partnering with companies and individuals who want to be advertised during the shows. Afterwards they upload these recorded shows on other platforms that include YouTube and the more hits they get the more money they make. He said all his planned live shows, including a London tour in April and another in Canada set for early May had to be cancelled because of the Covid-19 pandemic. While this has greatly affected his cash flow, he is however, trying to minimise his losses by doing online shows, which he says are much easier and safer for everyone. “The audiences seem to be loving tracks such as Uchandifunga and Rudo Imoto which is a rendition I did for the late Marshall Munhumumwe’s track.” googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Guni said in times like these artistes need to think outside the box because no one knows when the situation will end. “So it is important to quickly adjust, accept that this is the situation at hand so as to think of survival tactics.”
The musician has a brand new track Cater to You in which he collaborated with Audius Mtawarira.
It is earmarked to be released together with a video on a date to be announced soon, first on MTV, Trace and Channel O before any other platforms.