Nokuthaba Nkomo
STAFF WRITER
nkomon@dailynews.co.zw©️ DOCTORS have implored authorities to isolate Covid-19 patients at hospitals, as part of efforts to curb the disease’s spread in the country, the Daily News reports.  This comes as the government has so far allowed people who have contracted the disease without showing life-threatening conditions to self-isolate at their homes — a move which the doctors fear could be contributing to the rising local transmissions.  The chairperson of the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR), Fortune Nyamande, told the Daily News yesterday that isolating active cases at hospitals would slow down local transmissions. “Isolating patients in hospitals may help to slow down local infections, particularly in our setting where self-isolation at home is difficult and where there is always a risk of transmission to close family members. “The government can invoke the Public Health Act and isolate all active cases of Covid-19.
“However, this may be difficult when we have many active cases that surpass the admissions capacity of our isolation units,” Nyamande said.  The Zimbabwe Senior Hospital Doctors Association (SHDA), also said self-isolation was not ideal — as a patients’ movements could not be monitored to ascertain their interaction with unsuspecting members of the community.   The Public Health Act says the government should provide suitable hospitals or places of isolation for the accommodation and treatment of persons suffering from infectious diseases.  However, most Covid-19 patients are self-isolating and taking their medication from their homes where health workers are expected to check up on them regularly.  All this comes as doctors have also warned authorities to forestall a health catastrophe in the country by embarking on mass testing of people and increasing their surveillance at ports of entry, in the wake of the rising incidence of coronavirus through local transmission.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); They said the rising Covid-19 local transmissions were a red flag which demanded more testing in communities to establish the exact prevalence of the disease in the country.  The warnings also come as many Zimbabweans are increasingly disregarding the current lockdown restrictions, following their relaxation by authorities in the interests of the economy.  According to World Health Organisation, the coronavirus comes from a large family of viruses that cause illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases.  Its symptoms include pneumonia, high fever, flu, shortness of breath and diarrhoea — and the precautions that have to be taken include covering your mouth when coughing and sneezing, and continuously washing one’s hands.     Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 