Sindiso Mhlophe
SENIOR STAFF WRITER
mhlophes@dailynews.co.zwTHE Media Institute of Southern Africa (Misa) has appealed to the government to set up a fund to assist media outlets that have been hit hard by the effects of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.  This comes as the Covid-19 pandemic has hit hard various economic sectors in the country, and cross the globe, including industry, tourism and the media, resulting in declining revenue streams and incomes.  In a letter addressed to the Information minister Monica Mutsvangwa, Misa Zimbabwe chairperson Golden Maunganidze commended the government in allowing the media to freely operate during the national lockdown put in place to curb the spread of Covid-19, but said the move comes at a time when the future of the media in Zimbabwe is precariously hanging by the thread and on the verge of bankruptcy.  “This is in terms of the media’s sustainability and viability due to the untenable socio-economic situation which is hurting business in the wake of declining revenue streams and incomes.  “Honourable minister, as you rightly noted in your 2020 World Press Freedom Day statement, the media plays an essential role in providing critical information to the public that assists in making informed decisions. This is even more critical at a time when the country has put in place measures to combat the Covid-19 pandemic.   “It is therefore my humble plea, through your esteemed offices that the government should seriously consider coming up with a Media Sustainability Bailout Rescue Package. This can be in the form of tax or duty exemptions and moratoriums, over a realistically determined period, on newsprint and other mass media production and distribution equipment.  “The government should also consider reducing the registration and licence fees for media houses, as well as doing away with some of the punitive duplicitous levies and fees charged in terms of the country’s regulatory framework.  “A revolving fund which is administered independently can also be established in that regard,” he added.
Recently, the International Journalists’ Network (IJnet) launched a research project aimed at assessing the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic on journalism worldwide and to help re-imagine its future. “The effects of Covid-19 are already being framed as an extinction event for journalism, causing dozens of news outlets to collapse around the world. Thousands of newsroom jobs have been lost or reshaped by the pandemic.  “The pandemic has rapidly accelerated trends already evident worldwide, the migration and disappearance of advertising, the shrinkage and disappearance of print, the erosion of investigative reporting capability and the collapse of local news,” IJnet.  Meanwhile, the government announced an $18 billion stimulus to capacitate, the formal sector, small to medium enterprises (SMEs) and those in the informal sector, who have borne the brunt of the lockdown.
Vendors are already back at work in Mbare despite President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s indefinite extension of the national lockdown. 