Musicians, among them Jah Prayzah, Suluman Chimbetu and Alick Macheso who were used to playing with the backing of a full band were challenged to showcase their solo skills; and they didn’t disappoint at the time. And this year, “thanks” to the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, these musicians were forced to isolate and perform solo acts on various social media platforms. The 20-episode NashTV Lockdown Live programme screened on national television, apart from its Facebook edition has been the most popular one as it premieres most days of the week in the evening under a platform created for musicians by enterprising music promoter and businessman Tinashe Mutarisi. Just like the late Mtukudzi, the multi-ward-winning Mutarisi had launched NashTV on Facebook even before the national lockdown and musicians are hoping that even after the curfew is lifted, NashTV would do more to promote them. And the musicians who performed on this platform have positive stories to tell.
Gospel music star Charles Charamba who performed during the Lockdown Live show said he and musician wife Olivia felt obliged to showcase “as there was need to console and entertain the people locked up in homes. We ministered this showcase at Pockets Hill; it was anchored by Chipaz Promotions in conjunction with NashTV. We also did one on 18 April under the ministry of Information.” Since NashTV got a slot on national television a couple of weeks ago, the platform has invited dozens of musicians including gospel music sensation Mathias Mhere, sungura star Alick Macheso, Ras Caleb, Freeman, Kinnah, Poptain, Ndunge, Ras Pompy, Hwinza, Jah Master, Pumacol, Uncle Epatan, Bazooke, Enzo Ishall, Levels and DJ Fantan.
Mhere said he cherished the platform. Freeman, speaking through his manager Watson ‘‘Boss Watta’’ Kaselapanjila said the trick lies in seriousness on part of the musician when performing in an empty room before the cameras. For Ras Caleb putting across his message is what motivates him more, not the crowd. “When I am performing, I am not motivated by the nature of the crowd in attendance. All I want is to put the message across; that’s all. My lyrics are clean and my music is different from other Zimdancehall musicians, hence the platform offered by Nash TV works good for me as it helps to market my musical brand. Internet knows no boundary, hence when performing on such platforms it is always crucial to remember that one is performing for the whole world,” the Tokwe Mukosi hit-maker said. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Mutarisi is happy with the way Zimbabweans have embraced his television concept. 
He adds that NashTV is an online TV platform designed to plug existing gaps in the local arts industry particularly during this Covid-19 pandemic era where the whole world is reeling from the effects of set lockdown and social distancing measures. On the other hand, multi-award winning gospel diva Janet Manyowa, on her own, has managed to hold two concerts online, reaching out to thousands of her fans in the process. “I did two concerts Switch on Zimbabwe and Ndimi (Lockdown Version) during the lockdown as I wanted them to be memorable. On Switch on Zimbabwe, we managed to get corporate sponsorship (partnership) from ZB Bank. Apart from partnerships, the concerts attracted thousands of hits on social media which is a good thing for the growth of Janet Manyowa Music brand.” Manyowa concurred with Ras Caleb saying she is also motivated by the desire to spread the ‘Good News’ message.
She is not worried about the number of fans who attend the concert. “In music, some musicians get their energy or fuel from the crowd but for us gospel musicians we are here to give hope to the nation especially in this coronavirus period. We are operating on a level of faith hence when we preach the Word through music we do not necessarily concerned about the crowds but the intended purpose. We can preach to just one person. Yes, it’s a different ball game but it is good that we are continuing preaching the gospel to thousands of people through the Internet,” the Zadzisa singer said. While musicians have spoken about their experience with online concerts, fans expressed mixed views on online concerts. “I fell in love with the online concerts as I can watch the entire act without being disturbed by other fans, you know, at times you became stuck behind tall people, or being shoved in the back by those drunk when you attend a live concert in a hall or an arena,” Andrew Dzapasi, a music enthusiast, said. However, Shorai Mlambo said she misses to attending live concerts in person. “There are, of course, still many reasons to go to live shows… dancing with others, meeting the artists and buying merchandise among others,” the mother of one said.