Godknows Matarutse
SPORTS WRITER
matarutseg@dailynews.co.zw ©️ WHILE it’s no secret that the coronavirus (Covid-19) has plunged the global economy into meltdown, recent donations to local teams CAPS United and Highlanders have exposed the two giants of Zimbabwean football as charity cases.  The pandemic has caused chaos on the global stage with most local football clubs now reeling from the meltdown.
The development has seen some well-wishers coming forward to donate goods to some clubs to help them cushion their players during these trying times.  Recently, Bulawayo giants Highlanders received 60 bags of 10kg mealie meal and 150kg of rice from an Apostolic sect, Johane Masowe Chishanu while club members, fans and corporate partners also chipped in with an assortment of groceries.  CAPS United were also bailed out on Wednesday when socialite Wanisai Mutandwa through her Mahwindo Foundation donated groceries to the club ranging from salt, sugar, mealie meal and cooking oil, among other things.
Some critics, though, were quick to denounce the development, saying the donations are a mockery to the legendary status of these clubs.  In other developed leagues, clubs like Chelsea, Manchester United, Tottenham Hotspurs, Bayern Munich, Real Madrid and Inter Milan are at the forefront of helping their communities cope with the novel virus.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); These top clubs are providing food and other basic necessities to members of the public in their vicinities.
Some have even availed their stadia to health authorities who have converted them into temporary quarantine and triage areas as most facilities are overwhelmed by the high number of patients.  However, here in Zimbabwe it is the clubs that are on the receiving end as they are now on the brink of collapsing due to the lockdown.  Highlanders communications manager Ronald Moyo said as a club they enjoy a cordial relationship with their stakeholders and there was nothing wrong in them receiving the donations. “The club has a symbiotic relationship with the community. This relationship will always see the club receiving and giving back to the community,” Moyo said.  “For that reason, the club will continue attracting donations from its members, fans and corporate partners. There is nothing unusual about that.   CAPS United vice-president Nhamo Tutisani concurred with Moyo, saying: “It’s a welcome development actually. That’s why it’s a donation that we appreciate. Why should we question, in fact we are very grateful. It’s not about quantity or size, that gesture on its own is huge and people should learn to appreciate. These are not ordinary times.”  Most local clubs rely on sponsorship and gate-takings but things have been made difficult as football is currently on hold owing to coronavirus.  Highlanders were forced to suspend their contract with English coach Mark Harrison due to the novel virus, which has had an unprecedented impact on the sporting world.  With Harrison sitting on a foreign currency-based contract it became unbearable for the club’s benefactors to continue bankrolling the club to pay his dues.  It is a different case, however, when compared to other leagues, for instance South Africa.
Last week Kaizer Chiefs midfielder Willard Katsande, who plays in a financially stable league, donated goods worth R50 000 to vulnerable families in his rural home of Mutoko.  The 2020 season was supposed to have kicked off in March but had to be moved back after the novel virus began to spread in the country.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw  