©️ THE country’s medical practitioners on Thursday successfully conducted the first caesarean section on a pregnant woman with Covid-19 at Gweru Provincial Hospital, the Health and Child Care ministry has revealed.  In a statement, the ministry’s acting permanent secretary Gibson Mhlanga said both mother and baby were stable and admitted in isolation at the hospital.  “Zimbabwe has successfully conducted the delivery of its index case for a pregnant mother who tested positive for Covid-19. The baby was delivered through a caesarean section for an obstetric indication at Gweru Provincial Hospital on 28 May 2020.  “We would like to specifically thank and applaud the multidisciplinary team at Gweru Provincial Hospital, the leadership of the hospital and the provincial leadership for exemplary team work and a job well done. The lessons from this case will be used to model responses and management of similar cases in future,” Mhlanga said.  The medical practitioners who took part in the process were identified as Johannes Mukwembi, an obstetrician, a Kwidini, a scrub nurse, Prince Murambi and Tafadzwa Mutukwa, who are both anaesthesiologists.
Meanwhile, the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR)) and the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) on Friday made a donation of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to the Gweru District Covid-19 Taskforce.  The donation included 300 surgical gowns, 300 hand sanitisers, 300 shoe covers, 300 theatre caps, 300 disposable aprons, 300 masks, 300 gloves and 10 thermometers.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 