Vasco Chaya
STAFF WRITER
chayav@dailynews.co.zw©️ AT LEAST 118 people disappeared from various isolation centres throughout the country since the onset of the lockdown, the police have said.  This comes as the government said it is concerned about the number of returnees fleeing the centres in a development that may increase infections.  “The Zimbabwe Republic Police is concerned with the number of returnees who are escaping the isolation or quarantine centres, in the process putting the lives of their families and communities at risk of contracting Covid-19.  “A total of 118 people have escaped from various isolation centres throughout the country since the onset of the national lockdown. Some have been arrested while others are being sought by the police,” national police spokesperson Paul Nyathi said yesterday.  The national police spokesperson said all the returnees should undergo vetting under the supervision of the government.  “We urge family members and friends to be cautious before accepting returnees and ensure that they have gone through the Covid-19 vetting process which is coordinated by the ministry of Health and Child Care. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  “The public should report people who are sneaking into suburbs, villages and other public places without following the laid-down procedures. This includes those who are evading the customs and excise entry points and using undesignated points to enter into the country,” he said.  “The Zimbabwe Republic Police is closely working with the ministry of Health and Child Care to ensure that all those who escaped and those who are avoiding immigration formalities are brought to book.”  Meanwhile, the police have revealed that a total of 41 738 people have been arrested for violating various offences related to the national lockdown measures through contravening sections of SI 83/20, Liquor Act and other offences since the onset of the national lockdown on March 30 to date.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 