Jeffrey Muvundusi
in BULAWAYO SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean model Innocencia Nyathi says she is greatly inspired to be one of the contestants to take part at the prestigious Mrs Universe Africa set for Roodepoort Theatre in September. Fourteen contestants from different African countries have confirmed participation with the winner earmarked to represent Africa on the global stage of Mrs Universe. The 31-year-old Nyathi is quite confident that her participation at this year’s edition of the pageant will broaden her horizon when it comes to community work. Unlike other beauty pageants, Mrs Universe is open to married, divorced or widowed women who have done exceptional community work advocating for women empowerment. However, according to the organisers, due to the coronavirus pandemic all the pre-judging in terms of presentations interviews and talent performance will be done virtually. She is excited about how the Mrs Universe Africa journey is providing her a platform to broaden her reach and conduct the community work she is so passionate about. “The vision of the pageant is to bring wealth to the community and empower women; that is the reason I chose to participate in the pageant. As part of her advocacy she has lately been conducting a series of online events on women empowerment and campaigns that advocate against domestic violence. Nyathi is the founder of Image Proclaimed which has been empowering women and children to have a clear self-identity and image through workshops and master classes since 2012. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The purpose of the Mrs Universe Africa pageant is to support and empower women in Africa and to bring wealth to the community. The pageant creates a platform to inspire, mentor and support women. Mrs Universe Africa pageant advocates against domestic violence and abuse and raises awareness and funds for charities to help the victims of this social issue. The Mrs Universe pageant is the biggest pageant for married and divorced women in the world, 90 countries take part in it annually.