Tinashe Sibanda LIFESTYLE WRITER sibandat@dailynews.co.zw THE global coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic lockdowns have forced multi-genre MC Swithun Tinaapi Mapiye to defer some of his international projects. The musical genius was meant to commence tours in various cities across South Africa before eventually heading to overseas countries that include Trinidad, Jamaica, the United Kingdom and the United States. In an interview with the Daily News Mapiye said: “I was in the process of making a deal with the South African Broadcasting Company (SABC) to be slotted in as protégé of their professional radio DJs. Although the deal is still in motion, all plans have slowed down because of the obtaining lockdown.” Mapiye — better known as MC Prophet Worldwide — said although the pandemic had hit hard on his plans, they were however, still in place but have now slowed the pace because of travel bans in nations. He said he has managed to present his brand to international communities in countries as far as Trinidad, Jamaica, the UK and US and they have been very supportive. He said these sudden changes have come as a challenge to most arts players but to him it has been a valuable lesson to always be prepared for any circumstance one may face as these are always uncertain. MC Prophet Worldwide said his vision is bigger than his current goals and he has the discipline to keep on working hard no matter what the situation might present. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); He said one cannot be a success unless he or she changes another human being’s life, adding that it is everyone’s role to make the world a better place. He said he has no option but to hold on to what the government promises to do and follow all rules and regulations so the nation can see this through. The Chitungwiza-born MC — who started music in kindergarten as a percussion band member — has over the years shared the stage with acclaimed internal acts such as BBC Radio DJ Chris Goldfinger, Jamaicans Ricky Trooper, Popcaan, Mavado, Sizzla Kalonji, Turbulence, Elephant Man, Tony Rebel and Black Supremacy to mention a few. During the time he was resident at the Red Fox Hotel — once the hottest reggae hub in the capital — he also had the opportunity to share the stage with local talents such as the Red Fox Sound, Judgement Yard and Legendary Sound.