DENDERA music star Suluman Chimbetu yesterday donated an assortment of goods to orphans on behalf of Hope of Life Zimbabwe which are meant to alleviate the effects of coronavirus (Covid-19) lockdown. As Covid-19 continues to wreak havoc on poor communities, the Harare-based social organisation brought smiles to orphans in Glen Norah A Extension where it runs an orphanage. Part of the goods donated include mealie-meal, sugar, cooking oil and maheu.
Hope of Life Zimbabwe Founder and chairperson Tsvakai Muturuki said they decided to bring in Chimbetu as he is a good ambassador. “In future we want him to be our ambassador because of the excellent work he has done in communities and helping the poor.” Chimbetu, on his part called on the corporate world to help this new foundation. “I am humbled by the work that this organisation is doing in this community and I extend a bowl on its behalf to all those who can manage to donate to this noble cause.” The singer said Covid-19 is real and appealed to Zimbabweans to take care of themselves and their loved ones.
The singer said the donation comes at a time communities are in distress due to Covid-19. “It is unfortunate that one of those we wanted to donate to died before we could give him his share. But we will continue to give the donation to his family.” Muturuki said it has always been her wish to help the needy, especially orphanage children.
“While we successfully registered this organisation beginning of this year, this has been my childhood ambition. As a kid I used to share everything that my parents bought me with other less privileged children who would have touched me.” Hope of Life Zimbabwe currently houses eight orphans; four girls and four boys.
“I was also inspired to open this facility by my attachment at SOS where I used to work with the elderly and sick. It is now eight years since I started working with orphans and my hope is to have more children.” Mturuki, who has two children of her own, appealed to the government to come to their aid.
“It has not been easy to run this facility and I appeal to government, especially the social welfare department to help us.”Suluman Chimbetu, right, yesterday donated an assortment of goods to orphans on behalf of Hope of Life Zimbabwe.