©️ AS a young girl, Samantha Murozoki used to get into trouble for taking groceries from her home without her parents’ permission and giving them away to people she thought were struggling. That same girl has grown to become a heroine who is saving thousands from the jaws of hunger in Chitungwiza.
The mother of two was born and bred in Bulawayo before moving to Harare’s Mt Pleasant and later to Chitungwiza’s Unit A at the onset of the coronavirus lockdown to spend time with her sisters and mother.   “When lockdown was announced I was more worried about myself and my little sisters’ upkeep. I had no intention of taking care of people’s food needs, let alone on a daily basis. The plan was to rest and wait for the lockdown to end. But as fate would dictate, everything changed,” Samantha told the Daily News on Sunday. “During my short stay here (in Chitungwiza), I have learnt that a number of people are going to bed on empty stomachs. As a result, I used the US$80 I had to buy a few groceries to feed a few. “It worked for first few days and then I went on to sell my three pairs of shoes (sneakers) and the cash enabled me to continue for some days.” Now, long winding queues have become a common sight at around 7am and also at 3pm in Seke Unit A where Samantha prepares food for distribution among hungry children and families. “I remember the first day I cooked a 2kg pack of rice and fed 18 people, but the the next day they increased to 47 then 86 and today there are almost 2 000+ people,”said Samantha, a lawyer who specialises in immigration issues. “Every morning children come to get porridge, and then in the evening the number doubles as they also come along with their parents. I use 60 kilogrammes of maize meal daily.”   With the full support of her husband, parents and neighbours, Samantha has touched the hearts of many, which saw a variety of well-wishers and corporates chipping in to help feed the poor. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “I have been assisted by several companies and individuals who are operating from a backdrop of humanitarian work. This has made my work and mission more attainable,” she said. “The programme will run throughout the lockdown and chances are we could extend the programme by a month after the national lockdown.” Samantha also gives small relief packs to deserving families, including a cup of washing powder, sanitary pads and lotion. One Blessing Mabuzani, aged 45, volunteered to assist Samantha in cooking and cleaning after she benefitted for a couple of days. A recent Global Report on Food Crisis shows that the severe food insecurity situation in the country is expected to worsen this year due to the poor rainfall received in the agricultural season. “The 2020 harvest is forecast to remain below the five-year average, which would sustain a tight supply situation and curtail potential earnings from crop sales for farming households. “As a result, the acutely food-insecure rural population in need of urgent action is estimated at 4,3 million up to June 2020 (IPC, March 2020),” the report read. However, in a twist of events, Chitungwiza Municipality on Wednesday ordered Murozoki to close the kitchen, citing health hazards and contravention of the town’s by-laws. Acting town clerk Tonderai Kasu said her kitchen was not registered with the council in accordance with Chitungwiza Urban Council by-laws and she did not have a municipal licence for the work she was conducting. Kasu said the order for Murozoki to cease operations was made on the basis of genuine and legitimate concerns with respect to public health and safety. In a letter to Murozoki, Environmental Health officer Tongai Mukomondera said the kitchen was not approved by his department in terms of Chitungwiza Urban Council by-laws. “You are, therefore, advised to cease operations with immediate effect and take the necessary procedures to meet minimum requirements for a feeding kitchen,” he said. The council’s order was met with outrage from beneficiaries of the kitchen, philanthropists who were crowd funding to sponsor the initiative and a host of sympathisers. However, in a happy ending to the matter, the two parties reached a compromise on Friday with the Chitungwiza Municipality offering Murozoki a place to operate from. “The meeting we convened today (Friday) at our council head office yielded positive developments. Murozoki was forthcoming on the issue of registering her operations,” Kasu said. “She made a plea that council allows her to operate while the paperwork is being processed.
“Council has offered one of its properties, a crèche in Unit A, as a temporary site for her to conduct her charitable work. “Volunteers who are assisting with food preparation will be screened for Covid-19, and will undergo food-handlers medical examinations,” said Kasu, who also added that Murozoki has to meet all necessary regulatory requirements by the government and would get assistance and guidance from the district administrator while council will assist with security and order at the new premises.   Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw