Fungi Kwaramba
POLITICAL EDITOR
kwarambaf@dailynews.co.zw ©️ THE government said yesterday it would further tighten the ongoing national coronavirus lockdown, in a bid to contain the spread of the lethal disease in the country — following a dramatic recent surge in infections, the Daily News reports. This comes as the country has now recorded 149 positive cases of the virus, with a whopping 93 of those infections being registered inside three days this week. “We are going to continue tightening the lockdown so that we protect the citizens, because we have seen a surge in infections. “We have not won the war (against coronavirus) and our people should be on guard and continue acting responsibly.
“As the police, we are going to make sure that people follow the law, and those who are found breaking the law will be punished accordingly,” Home Affairs minister Kazembe Kazembe said yesterday. “We are also investigating cases where people are getting into town without letters or with fake letters. Police are also conducting spot checks to fish out people who are not supposed to be in town,” he added. This week, police also said they had arrested more than 40 000 people since the government imposed the current stay-at-home order at the end of March. Meanwhile, walk-abouts by Daily News crews in major cities around the country yesterday showed that vendors and illegal money changers are part of the high human traffic in urban areas.
Zimbabwe is currently under an indefinite lockdown which was recently extended by President Emmerson Mnangagwa, to reduce the spread of Covid-19 infections.
This week, Zimbabwe recorded a staggering 93 new positive cases of the disease, with the majority of them involving returnees and deportees from South Africa, Botswana and Mozambique. The spike in coronavirus cases came after Defence minister — also the deputy chairperson of the Covid-19 taskforce — Oppah Muchinguri-Kashiri told Parliament on Wednesday that authorities were ill-prepared to deal with returning residents and deportees. She said there had been a recent influx of returnees, particularly from South Africa and Botswana.
“That has put us under tremendous pressure and we have found ourselves incapacitated. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); “Within the next week we are expecting 3 000 more returnees from various countries … We are also falling short in terms of PPEs and testing kits which remain a concern to us because of international competition,” Muchinguri-Kashiri said. This came as police said 118 returnees had fled quarantine centres, with some of the facilities condemned by both returnees and rights groups for being inhabitable. In April, a group of Zimbabweans which had returned home from overseas clashed with authorities over poor facilities at one of the colleges they were accommodated at in Harare. They ended up requesting to pay from their own pockets for decent accommodation at some of the hotels in the capital city.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw