Austin Karonga SPORTS WRITER
karongaa@dailynews.co.zw©️ A GROUP of former Warriors players teamed up once again to provide groceries to the elderly in the suburb of Mzilikazi in Bulawayo as a way to help the community cope during the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.  Ex-Zimbabwe internationals Esrom “Yellowman” Nyandoro, Richard “Dabuka Express” Choruma and Muzondiwa “Lazy Mzoe” Mugadza donated food stuffs comprising mealie-meal, sugar, salt, cooking oil, sugar beans and soya mince to about 75 households recently.  With a nationwide lockdown in place since March 30, most families especially in disadvantaged communities like Mzilikazi are finding it difficult to put food on the table.  Even before the virus broke out, the World Food Programme had indicated that at least 5,5 million Zimbabweans including those living in urban centres were in need of food aid.  With the lockdown in place, the majority of Zimbabweans, who earn a living in the informal sector, are not able to work thereby increasing the number of those in need of food aid.  googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Choruma, who was the heartbeat in the all-conquering Highlanders side in the late 90s and 2000s, promised to do more for the elderly and other disadvantaged members of the community in future.  “As former players we thought to lend a helping hand to our childhood society.  I hope we (managed to) put smiles on the faces of many and with resources permitting we hope that we shall keep doing the same,” Choruma said.  Nyandoro has been at the forefront of helping out fellow Zimbabweans ever since the Covid-19 broke out.
Through his Esrom Nyandoro Foundation, the former AmaZulu and Mamelodi Sundowns midfield enforcer has already held an auction of some of his memorabilia from his playing days to raise funds for the poor. “As the Foundation and friends, we have come together as well to fight this pandemic. I just want to urge everyone to keep safe, stay home, sanitise all the time, wear your mask all the time you go out and please guys take care and stay safe,” Nyandoro said.  “Let’s join hands together we can beat this pandemic.”  The trio were joined by Gain Wholesalers with the company donating face masks to the elderly. One of the recipients of the donations Elizabeth Mpofu, 83, a resident of Mzilikazi suburb, was happy with the unexpected harvest. “We have received manna from Heaven that we did not expect to get. Today we say may the Lord bless the children who have done this,” Mpofu said.  Zimbabwe has so far recorded four deaths from the confirmed 37 cases of the novel virus which was discovered in Wuhan, China last year.  The nationwide lockdown has been extended twice already and it might be prolonged further when President Emerson Mnangagwa announces new measures.    Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 