©️ THE Southern African Development Community (Sadc) has resolved to test all people before they voluntarily return or are deported to their countries of origin — to arrest the spread of the global pandemic within the region, the Daily News on Sunday reports.  This comes as hordes of Zimbabweans are voluntarily returning home, while many others have been deported — mainly from South Africa and Botswana — with some of them testing positive for the lethal disease.  It also comes as Zimbabwe has now confirmed 160 cases of the global pandemic, with four deaths and 29 recoveries.  Speaking on the sidelines of a virtual Sadc meeting of ministers on the socio-economic impact of Covid-19 on Friday, Foreign Affairs minister Sibusiso Moyo said it had been resolved to immediately address the issue of returnees — in order to mitigate the spread of Covid-19 in the region.   “This was an issue which took a long time to debate, where … member states considered that it was imperative that they (returnees) should be tested before they are deported.  “These are issues which were then referred to the Health Technical Committee so that it can deal with these issues and come up with recommendations before the 10th of June 2020.  “So, the key issue is that Sadc desires a co-ordinated response on Covid-19,” Moyo said.  Meanwhile, health experts in Zimbabwe have suggested a two-pronged approach to deal with returnees — closing borders completely and increasing testing and screening at quarantine centres across the country to stop the local spread of the lethal virus. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  Moyo said Sadc member states had also discussed regional funding for Covid-19 as a bloc.
“As you may be aware, this is the time when we are considering the budget of the secretariat, and there were aspects which the secretariat was being impeded from undertaking because of budget limitations — and they were asking for further budget support from the reserve funds and contingency fund.  “The feeling was that Sadc needs to clearly explain the circumstances and cost structure of the secretariat, which would be the basis upon which the requirements of the secretariat could be considered,” he said.  “The other issue was … non-contribution by member states. So far, less than a third of member states had contributed about US$6 million, out of US$47 million which is expected in terms of the budget.  “So, there was emphasis that as a regional body we must invoke Article 33 and Article 4 of the Treaty on contributions — so that member states can feel that there is seriousness in the manner in which we conduct our affairs, particularly in terms of contributions,” Moyo said.  He also said they had discussed how to improve regional trade, given that this had been negatively affected by the Covid-19 pandemic.  “One important aspect has been the state of industrialisation and inter-trade among member states.
“It was emphasised that whatever procurement, trade and any other trading services and focus on industrialisation must be within the continent and the region,” Moyo said.  Copyright ©️ 2020 Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe. All rights reserved. Terms of Use |Privacy Policy
By accessing dailynews.co.zw you are agreeing to the Daily News’ content terms and conditions. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, then you should not use dailynews.co.zw or any of the Daily News’ content, including in print.
Sharing illegally sourced Daily News premium content without permission is a serious breach of the Daily News’ Terms and Conditions (T&Cs), as well as Copyright Policy. Legal action will be taken against those who transgress these T&Cs and Copyright Policy.
This website and other ANZ platforms are provided “as is”, and make no express or implied representations or warranties of any kind relating to all the materials contained on the various platforms. Permission to republish articles can be directed to:
Email: letters@dailynews.co.zw 