FORMER Warriors international Hardlife Zvirekwi has overcome a lot of obstacles in his career over the years but at the moment he is facing his toughest battle yet due to the coronavirus (Covid-19). Zvirekwi, who can play both in midfield and defence, left many contemplating whether or not he would ever play football again after he was involved in a near-fatal car crash on the eve of the start of the 2018 season. Doctors had to amputate his left wrist due to the extent of the injuries he suffered when his vehicle veered off the road along Samora Machel Avenue in Harare. The 33-year-old, however, surprised many when he made a comeback having been sidelined for four months.
He went on to feature prominently for CAPS United and even came close to leading the Green Machine to last year’s title only to miss out to FC Platinum on the last day of the campaign. Despite his loyal service to the club for seven years, Zvirekwi was part of a cast of senior players released by the Green Machine towards the end of last year after they did not renew his contract. In order to get back his career on track, Zvirekwi was training with Harare City for the better part of the off-season with the hope of signing a contract with the Sunshine Boys. However, the outbreak of Covid-19 halted everything as it delayed the start of the 2020 Castle Lager Premiership season. The development left clubs inactive as the country is under lockdown since March 30 in order to curb the spread of the novel virus. The Sunshine Boys had not made a decision yet on the utility player and it left Zvirekwi in limbo without any income as he is not contracted to any club. The coronavirus-induced lockdown has come with its challenges for the former Gunners defender as he has to provide food for his family. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); Although the spread of the coronavirus has brought about unlimited uncertainty in Zvirekwi’s career and football in general, the former Harare United and Gunners player is hoping to use the downtime to keep in shape in order to be ready when the game is finally given the green light to resume and hopefully earn a contract with the Sunshine Boys. “What I have been doing during this time is taking care of my physical aspects. It’s not enough of course because you also want to work aspects of the game. But I can’t complain really, it is what it is and there is not much I can do,” Zvirekwi said. “Prior to all this, I was training with Harare City but nothing had materialised. Negotiations were ongoing; there were things that they said they want to put in place before I can sign so I’m just waiting to hear from them.” Zvirekwi’s exit from Makepekepe was greeted with shock by most football lovers especially due to the manner in which the Green Machine conducted their business. Zvirekwi with a number of senior players were notified by the club that their contracts would not be renewed via a club WhatsApp group chat. After all the loyal service and dedication he had shown over the years, United somehow discarded their former skipper in an unusual manner. Despite the acrimonious exit at CAPS United, Zvirekwi does not hold any grudges towards the club and their management. “I have no hard feelings regarding the manner in which I left CAPS United, if anything I’m grateful,” Zvirekwi said.
“They made me who I am. I played my part and maybe it was the right time to part ways. CAPS United gave me a lot of good memories. I earned call ups to the national team, won the championship with the club among many other achievements.” Defender Hardlife Zvirekwi in action for Makepekepe last season .