Given the cost burdens that have come with the Covid-19 pandemic, individuals and institutions are looking at ways to minimise costs while at the same time utilising every possible time to deliver on their mandates, whether socially or commercially. During the Covid-19 epidemic, businesses are expected to use their resources and expertise to help combat the global pandemic. At the same time, the surge in employees, students, teachers and other professionals working from home has resulted in a sharp demand for digital “telecommuting” tools such as voice and video conferencing, online collaboration and chat systems. As an economic and socially responsible entity, Cassava Fintech has answered to the call and has come up with a unique product that is aimed at making sure that those who want to stay connected will do so without the associated cost burdens. Cassava Fintech International (CFI), which is a subsidiary of Econet Global, recently released an enhanced voice and video conferencing service that allows up to 20 people on one call. The service, branded Sasai TeamTalk, was unveiled as a promotional offer of FREE Sasai Conference calling, between 8am and 5pm every Sunday until the end of the month. Sasai Team Talk will allow multiple users to collaborate and chat virtually from anywhere in the world while staying informed and up to speed with the latest news and information on Sasai’s Explore feature. The service is available through the Sasai all-in-one super App that allows users to pay, chat, and explore a vast range of services, content and much more, and has been unveiled in Zimbabwe first. Sasai TeamTalk will offer free voice and video conference service, with secure end-to-end encryption, that connects up to 20 people on a single call, compared to telcos and most other social media platforms that offer between five and eight people on a conference call. The timing of this service could not have been more appropriate. Families, communities, industries and nations have been impacted by Covid-19 pandemic. Lockdowns, working from home and social distancing have been introduced as some of the measures to stem the spread of the virus and flatten the curve. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); }); The Sasai super App was first launched in August 2019 and is already being used in 180 countries across the globe.
In addition, as part of the promotion, Sasai data costs at any other times and days will be at half of the WhatsApp data costs until May 31, 2020, as a way to bring some relief to Zimbabweans. The Sasai super App — which can take up to 250 people in a chat group —already brings families closer by allowing international remittances from the United Kingdom, European Union and South Africa to Zimbabwe and over 30 countries across the world, at the lowest fees available. To access and instantly use Sasai TeamTalk, one must download the Sasai App on the Google Play Store or the Apple App Store, start a chat and simply click on the voice or video camera icon. Users of Sasai TeamTalk can, among other things, swap between the front and rear-facing camera, mute the call and, of course, end the call when they are done, by tapping the red phone button.