HEALTH experts have warned government against re-opening of schools next month as it exposes not only teachers and learners, but also their parents to the deadly coronavirus (Covid-19), the Daily News on Sunday reports.  This comes as government has announced that it intends to re-open schools in five phases starting next month, first with candidates sitting for public examinations amid a recent surge in the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country.  In its Covid-19 update yesterday, the ministry of Health and Child Care said 11 more people had tested positive out of which nine were imported cases and two were local transmissions, taking the national tally to 160, including four deaths  Of the imported cases, two are from Botswana and seven from South Africa.
Yesterday, the Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human Rights (ZADHR) secretary Norman Matara told the Daily News on Sunday that the plans by the government were not only unpalatable, but also ill-conceived.   Secretary for Primary and Secondary Education Thumisang Thabela told Parliament last week that the mid-year examinations would be written between June 29 and July 22. googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1588599181508-1'); });  But teachers’ unions have expressed concern that safety measures might not be ready in time.
Zimbabwe Teachers Association (Zimta) chief executive officer Sifiso Ndlovu told the Daily News on Sunday in an interview that scheduling examinations was not a panacea to Covid-19 and that “a declaration” by the government means nothing if the necessary health protocols recommended by the World Health Organisation were not followed.  “We are not ready for June examinations. Teachers are not willing. If the authorities go ahead with their plan, we are headed for industrial conflict. We cannot have pronouncements that ignore environmental dictates,” Ndlovu said.  The doctors also called on President Emmerson Mnangagwa to ensure that quarantine centres around the country were habitable to stop inmates from fleeing.  “The reason why inmates are running away is because the conditions in some of the quarantine centres are not fit for human habitation. The government must ensure facilities are improved and also that inmates do not share utensils and bathrooms. They must be living in hygienic environments,” Matara said.  On the other hand, Senior Hospital Doctors Association secretary Arron Musara said the government should further tighten surveillance along borders to track down returnees using illegal entry points.  “The first thing is that quarantine centres must be conducive for human habitation. We understand that there is a challenge because of the huge numbers that we are receiving, but there is no option because the inmates must not feel like they are in a prison. They will not like staying there.  “We must also be able to track down border jumpers because if that is not done, then we will soon experience a worrisome situation where local transmissions will increase,” Musara said.  This weekend, Mnangagwa is set to review the progress made by the government in the fight against Covid-19 after he indefinitely extended the national lockdown a fortnight ago.