ZIMBABWE’S opposition parties, led by the popular youthful Nelson Chamisa of the MDC Alliance, must continue to exert pressure on the Zanu PF government to implement economic and political reforms to rescue the long-suffering citizens. The country is currently battling to flatten the coronavirus (Covid-19) cases, which continue to rise by the day.
It is clear the government is ill-prepared for the catastrophe that is on our doorstep, with Cabinet ministers earlier this week admitting that the resources to fight the novel virus are inadequate. Zimbabwe’s health delivery system was already in dire straits after years of poor funding and corruption before the advent of the pandemic. The World Food Programme (WFP) has already announced that at least 5,5 million Zimbabweans would need urgent aid after most crops were affected by drought Even those living in urban areas are also in need of urgent food aid as they can no longer afford proper nutrition.
The Zimbabwe dollar which was ill-advisedly re-introduced last year by under-fire Finance minister Mthuli Ncube is depreciating in value against the United States dollar. This has resulted in prices of basic goods constantly shooting up daily, thereby eroding the salaries and incomes of an already over-burdened population. Ever since the nationwide lockdown was introduced to combat the spread of Covid-19 on March 30, there has been an increase in the cases of human rights abuses. What is disappointing though is that the opposition, including Chamisa, seems un-interested.
The opposition should be shouting out loud at the government, pressing for dialogue and reforms to extricate this country from the current problems. Their silence creates a perfect opportunity for President Emmerson Mnangagwa and Zanu PF to continue to rule as they please, further hurting the economy and the people. At the moment, the economy is deteriorating at an alarming rate with Zimbabweans barely able to make ends meet but there is no one to call Mnangagwa to order since the opposition’s focus is elsewhere.
Zimbabweans have suffered for a long time and Zanu PF has shown us that they do not have a solution to our problems.